And gladly wolde he lerne, and gladly teche.
Nowher so besy a man as he ther n' as, And yet he semed besier than he was.
For gold in phisike is a cordial; Therefore he loved gold in special.
Wide was his parish, and houses fer asonder.
That field hath eyen, and the wood hath ears.
Min be the travaille, and thin be the glorie.
And brought of mighty ale a large quart.
The gretest clerkes ben not the wisest men.
I hold a mouses wit not worth a leke, That hath but on hole for to sterten to.
That he is gentil that doth gentil dedis.
Therefore behoveth him a ful long spone, That shall eat with a fend.
Fie on possession, But if a man be vertuous withal.
Truth is the highest thing that man may keep.
Full wise is he that can himselven knowe.
The proverbe saith that many a smale maketh a grate.
Of harmes two the lesse is for to cheese.
Right as an aspen lefe she gan to quake.
He helde about him alway, out of drede, A world of folke.
One eare it heard, at the other out it went.
Eke wonder last but nine deies never in toun.
Go, little booke! go, my little tragedie!
Nature, the vicar of the Almightie Lord.
For iii may keep a counsel if twain be away.
And when he is out of sight, quickly also is he out of mind.
Of two evils, the less is always to be chosen.
Old proverbe says, That byrd ys not honest That fyleth hys owne nest.
All a green willow, willow, All a green willow is my garland.
He that will not when he may, When he would he shall have nay.
Than catch and hold while I may, fast binde, fast finde.
While betweene two stooles my taile goe to the ground.
Wedding is destiny, And hanging likewise.
God never sends th' mouth but he sendeth meat.
When the skie falth we shall have Larkes.
Feare may force a man to cast beyond the moone.
Nothing is impossible to a willing hart.
Let the world wagge,[11-4] and take mine ease in myne Inne.
When all candles bee out, all cats be gray.
No man ought to looke a given horse in the mouth.
I perfectly feele even at my fingers end.
Reckeners without their host must recken twice.
The neer to the church, the further from God.
Now for good lucke, cast an old shooe after me.
It hurteth not the toung to give faire words.
To hold with the hare and run with the hound.
She is nether fish nor flesh, nor good red herring.
When the steede is stolne, shut the stable durre.
Pryde will have a fall; For pryde goeth before and shame commeth after.
She looketh as butter would not melt in her mouth.
It is a deere collop That is cut out of th' owne flesh.
Every cocke is proud on his owne dunghill.
The rolling stone never gathereth mosse.
Men say, kinde will creepe where it may not goe.
The cat would eate fish, and would not wet her feete.
While the grasse groweth the horse starveth.
Better one byrde in hand than ten in the wood.
Children learne to creepe ere they can learne to goe.
Who is worse shod than the shoemaker's wife?
Who waite for dead men shall goe long barefoote.
I pray thee let me and my fellow have A haire of the dog that bit us last night.
But in deede, A friend is never knowne till a man have neede.
This wonder (as wonders last) lasted nine daies.
All thing is the woorse for the wearing.
All is not Gospell that thou doest speake.
Might have gone further and have fared worse.
Three may keepe counsayle, if two be away.
The greatest Clerkes be not the wisest men.
Out of Gods blessing into the warme Sunne.
It is a foule byrd that fyleth his owne nest.
Hee must have a long spoone, shall eat with the devill.
It had need to bee A wylie mouse that should breed in the cats eare.
Leape out of the frying pan into the fyre.
Much water goeth by the mill That the miller knoweth not of.
He must needes goe whom the devill doth drive.
To th' end of a shot and beginning of a fray.
It is better to be An old man's derling than a yong man's werling.
Be the day never so long, Evermore at last they ring to evensong.
I know on which side my bread is buttred.
It will not out of the flesh that is bred in the bone.
Who is so deafe or so blinde as is hee That wilfully will neither heare nor see?
Went in at the tone eare and out at the tother.
An ill winde that bloweth no man to good.
For when I gave you an inch, you tooke an ell.
Would yee both eat your cake and have your cake?
Every man for himselfe and God for us all.
Though he love not to buy the pig in the poke.
God sendeth and giveth both mouth and the meat.
Except wind stands as never it stood, It is an ill wind turns none to good.
At Christmas play and make good cheer, For Christmas comes but once a year.
Such, mistress, such Nan, Such master, such man.
Who goeth a borrowing Goeth a sorrowing.
'T is merry in hall Where beards wag all.
Dry sun, dry wind; Safe bind, safe find.
The fallyng out of faithfull frends is the renuyng of loue.
For a man's house is his castle, _et domus sua cuique tutissimum refugium_.
Magna Charta is such a fellow that he will have no sovereign.
Methought I saw the grave where Laura lay.
Shall I, like an hermit, dwell On a rock or in a cell?
If she undervalue me, What care I how fair she be?
If she seem not chaste to me, What care I how chaste she be?
Fierce warres and faithful loves shall moralize my song.
A gentle knight was pricking on the plaine.
O happy earth, Whereon thy innocent feet doe ever tread!
The noblest mind the best contentment has.
Ay me, how many perils doe enfold The righteous man, to make him daily fall!
Eftsoones they heard a most melodious sound.
Be bolde, Be bolde, and everywhere, Be bold.
For all that Nature by her mother-wit Could frame in earth.
Ill can he rule the great that cannot reach the small.
Who will not mercie unto others show, How can he mercy ever hope to have?
That to live by one man's will became the cause of all men's misery.
How at heaven's gates she claps her wings, The morne not waking til she sings.
Be valyaunt, but not too venturous. Let thy attyre bee comely, but not costly.
The finest edge is made with the blunt whetstone.
It seems to me (said she) that you are in some brown study.
He reckoneth without his Hostesse.[32-8] Love knoweth no lawes.
I mean not to run with the Hare and holde with the Hounde.
There can no great smoke arise, but there must be some fire.
Goe to bed with the Lambe, and rise with the Larke.
Where the streame runneth smoothest, the water is deepest.
I am glad that my Adonis hath a sweete tooth in his head.
A Rose is sweeter in the budde than full blowne.
Sweet food of sweetly uttered knowledge.
High-erected thoughts seated in the heart of courtesy.
They are never alone that are accompanied with noble thoughts.
Fool! said my muse to me, look in thy heart, and write.
And out of mind as soon as out of sight.
None ever loved but at first sight they loved.
Young men think old men are fools; but old men know young men are fools.
Virtue is not malicious; wrong done her Is righted even when men grant they err.
Who to himself is law no law doth need, Offends no law, and is a king indeed.
'T is immortality to die aspiring, As if a man were taken quick to heaven.
They 're only truly great who are truly good.
Let pride go afore, shame will follow after.
Promise is most given when the least is said.
Sacred religion! mother of form and fear.
And for the few that only lend their ear, That few is all the world.
This is the thing that I was born to do.
Unless above himself he can Erect himself, how poor a thing is man!
Had in him those brave translunary things That the first poets had.
I 'm armed with more than complete steel, The justice of my quarrel.
Who ever loved that loved not at first sight?
By shallow rivers, to whose falls Melodious birds sing madrigals.
And I will make thee beds of roses And a thousand fragrant posies.
Excess of wealth is cause of covetousness.
O, thou art fairer than the evening air Clad in the beauty of a thousand stars.
Now would I give a thousand furlongs of sea for an acre of barren ground.
What seest thou else In the dark backward and abysm of time?
I will be correspondent to command, And do my spiriting gently.
The fringed curtains of thine eye advance.
_Gon._ Here is everything advantageous to life. _Ant._ True; save means to live.
Misery acquaints a man with strange bedfellows.
_Fer._ Here 's my hand. _Mir._ And mine, with my heart in 't.
Deeper than did ever plummet sound I 'll drown my book.
Where the bee sucks, there suck I; In a cowslip's bell I lie.
Merrily, merrily shall I live now, Under the blossom that hangs on the bough.
Home-keeping youth have ever homely wits.
I have no other but a woman's reason: I think him so, because I think him so.
O, how this spring of love resembleth The uncertain glory of an April day!
And if it please you, so; if not, why, so.
Except I be by Sylvia in the night, There is no music in the nightingale.
O heaven! were man But constant, he were perfect.
Come not within the measure of my wrath.
I will make a Star-chamber matter of it.
It is a familiar beast to man, and signifies love.
Seven hundred pounds and possibilities is good gifts.
I had rather than forty shillings I had my Book of Songs and Sonnets here.
O base Hungarian wight! wilt thou the spigot wield?
"Convey," the wise it call. "Steal!" foh! a fico for the phrase!
Sail like my pinnace to these golden shores.
Tester I 'll have in pouch, when thou shalt lack, Base Phrygian Turk!
Here will be an old abusing of God's patience and the king's English.
Faith, thou hast some crotchets in thy head now.
Why, then the world 's mine oyster, Which I with sword will open.
Like a fair house, built on another man's ground.
I cannot tell what the dickens his name is.
What a taking was he in when your husband asked who was in the basket!
The rankest compound of villanous smell that ever offended nostril.
Your hearts are mighty, your skins are whole.
So curses all Eve's daughters, of what complexion soever.
Who may, in the ambush of my name, strike home.
I hold you as a thing ensky'd and sainted.
Some rise by sin, and some by virtue fall.
This will last out a night in Russia, When nights are longest there.
Condemn the fault, and not the actor of it?
The law hath not been dead, though it hath slept.
Our compell'd sins Stand more for number than for accompt.
The miserable have no other medicine, But only hope.
A breath thou art, Servile to all the skyey influences.
The hand that hath made you fair hath made you good.
Virtue is bold, and goodness never fearful.
There, at the moated grange, resides this dejected Mariana.
O, what may man within him hide, Though angel on the outward side!
Every true man's apparel fits your thief.
A forted residence 'gainst the tooth of time And razure of oblivion.
My business in this state Made me a looker on here in Vienna.
What 's mine is yours, and what is yours is mine.
The pleasing punishment that women bear.
A wretched soul, bruised with adversity.
Small cheer and great welcome makes a merry feast.
One Pinch, a hungry lean-faced villain, A mere anatomy.
A needy, hollow-eyed, sharp-looking wretch, A living-dead man.
Let 's go hand in hand, not one before another.
He hath indeed better bettered expectation.
He wears his faith but as the fashion of his hat.
What, my dear Lady Disdain! are you yet living?
There 's a skirmish of wit between them.
Shall I never see a bachelor of threescore again?
I have a good eye, uncle; I can see a church by daylight.
Some Cupid kills with arrows, some with traps.
From the crown of his head to the sole of his foot,[51-1] he is all mirth.
Every one can master a grief but he that has it.
Is most tolerable, and not to be endured.
The fashion wears out more apparel than the man.
O, what authority and show of truth Can cunning sin cover itself withal!
O, that he were here to write me down an ass!
Men Can counsel and speak comfort to that grief Which they themselves not feel.
Charm ache with air, and agony with words.
For there was never yet philosopher That could endure the toothache patiently.
Light seeking light doth light of light beguile.
And men sit down to that nourishment which is called supper.
Affliction may one day smile again; and till then, sit thee down, sorrow!
Devise, wit; write, pen; for I am for whole volumes in folio.
The boy hath sold him a bargain,--a goose.
To sell a bargain well is as cunning as fast and loose.
Many can brook the weather that love not the wind.
Priscian! a little scratched, 't will serve.
They have been at a great feast of languages, and stolen the scraps.
In the posteriors of this day, which the rude multitude call the afternoon.
They have measured many a mile To tread a measure with you on this grass.
I have seen the day of wrong through the little hole of discretion.
The words of Mercury are harsh after the songs of Apollo.
O, hell! to choose love by another's eyes.
A proper man, as one shall see in a summer's day.
I 'll put a girdle round about the earth In forty minutes.
A lion among ladies is a most dreadful thing.
Bless thee, Bottom! bless thee! thou art translated.
I have an exposition of sleep come upon me.
I have had a dream, past the wit of man to say what dream it was.
For never anything can be amiss, When simpleness and duty tender it.
A very gentle beast, and of a good conscience.
The iron tongue of midnight hath told twelve.
My ventures are not in one bottom trusted, Nor to one place.
Now, by two-headed Janus, Nature hath framed strange fellows in her time.
Though Nestor swear the jest be laughable.
There are a sort of men whose visages Do cream and mantle like a standing pond.
I am Sir Oracle, And when I ope my lips, let no dog bark!
I do know of these That therefore only are reputed wise For saying nothing.
Fish not, with this melancholy bait, For this fool gudgeon, this opinion.
They are as sick that surfeit with too much, as they that starve with nothing.
Superfluity comes sooner by white hairs, but competency lives longer.
God, made him, and therefore let him pass for a man.
The devil can cite Scripture for his purpose.
A goodly apple rotten at the heart: O, what a goodly outside falsehood hath!
Many a time and oft In the Rialto you have rated me.
For sufferance is the badge of all our tribe.
You call me misbeliever, cut-throat dog, And spit upon my Jewish gaberdine.
For when did friendship take A breed for barren metal of his friend?
Mislike me not for my complexion, The shadow'd livery of the burnish'd sun.
It is a wise father that knows his own child.
Truth will come to sight; murder cannot be hid long.
And the vile squeaking of the wry-necked fife.
If my gossip Report be an honest woman of her word.
If it will feed nothing else, it will feed my revenge.
There is no vice so simple but assumes Some mark of virtue in his outward parts.
Thus ornament is but the guiled shore To a most dangerous sea.
The seeming truth which cunning times put on To entrap the wisest.
Here are a few of the unpleasant'st words That ever blotted paper!
The kindest man, The best-condition'd and unwearied spirit In doing courtesies.
Thus when I shun Scylla, your father, I fall into Charybdis, your mother.
What! wouldst thou have a serpent sting thee twice?
I never knew so young a body with so old a head.
A Daniel come to judgment! yea, a Daniel!
A second Daniel, a Daniel, Jew! Now, infidel, I have you on the hip.
I thank thee, Jew, for teaching me that word.
I am never merry when I hear sweet music.
This night methinks is but the daylight sick.
Fair ladies, you drop manna in the way Of starved people.
The little foolery that wise men have makes a great show.
Well said: that was laid on with a trowel.
_Cel._ Not a word? _Ros._ Not one to throw at a dog.
O, how full of briers is this working-day world!
Beauty provoketh thieves sooner than gold.
The big round tears Coursed one another down his innocent nose In piteous chase.
For in my youth I never did apply Hot and rebellious liquors in my blood.
Therefore my age is as a lusty winter, Frosty, but kindly.
I shall ne'er be ware of mine own wit till I break my shins against it.
Under the greenwood tree Who loves to lie with me.
I met a fool i' the forest, A motley fool.
And rail'd on Lady Fortune in good terms, In good set terms.
The "why" is plain as way to parish church.
True is it that we have seen better days.
And wiped our eyes Of drops that sacred pity hath engender'd.
Oppress'd with two weak evils, age and hunger.
Blow, blow, thou winter wind! Thou art not so unkind As man's ingratitude.
The fair, the chaste, and unexpressive she.
It goes much against my stomach. Hast any philosophy in thee, shepherd?
He that wants money, means, and content is without three good friends.
This is the very false gallop of verses.
Every one fault seeming monstrous till his fellow-fault came to match it.
I would the gods had made thee poetical.
Down on your knees, And thank Heaven, fasting, for a good man's love.
I had rather have a fool to make me merry than experience to make me sad.
I will scarce think you have swam in a gondola.
Good orators, when they are out, they will spit.
Men have died from time to time, and worms have eaten them,--but not for love.
Can one desire too much of a good thing?
The horn, the horn, the lusty horn Is not a thing to laugh to scorn.
Chewing the food[71-2] of sweet and bitter fancy.
The fool doth think he is wise, but the wise man knows himself to be a fool.
I will kill thee a hundred and fifty ways.
How bitter a thing it is to look into happiness through another man's eyes!
Here comes a pair of very strange beasts, which in all tongues are called fools.
An ill-favoured thing, sir, but mine own.
Your If is the only peacemaker; much virtue in If.
Look in the chronicles; we came in with Richard Conqueror.
Nothing comes amiss; so money comes withal.
And do as adversaries do in law, Strive mightily, but eat and drink as friends.
Who wooed in haste, and means to wed at leisure.
The hind that would be mated by the lion Must die for love.
Our remedies oft in ourselves do lie, Which we ascribe to Heaven.
Oft expectation fails, and most oft there Where most it promises.
I will show myself highly fed and lowly taught.
A young man married is a man that 's marr'd.
Make the coming hour o'erflow with joy, And pleasure drown the brim.
The web of our life is of a mingled yarn, good and ill together.
Praising what is lost Makes the remembrance dear.
The inaudible and noiseless foot of Time.
All impediments in fancy's course Are motives of more fancy.
The bitter past, more welcome is the sweet.
We will draw the curtain and show you the picture.
Journeys end in lovers meeting, Every wise man's son doth know.
He does it with a better grace, but I do it more natural.
Is there no respect of place, parsons, nor time in you?
My purpose is, indeed, a horse of that colour.
I am all the daughters of my father's house, And all the brothers too.
Foolery, sir, does walk about the orb like the sun; it shines everywhere.
Oh, what a deal of scorn looks beautiful In the contempt and anger of his lip!
Love sought is good, but given unsought is better.
I think we do know the sweet Roman hand.
Put thyself into the trick of singularity.
'T is not for gravity to play at cherry-pit with Satan.
What, man! defy the Devil: consider, he is an enemy to mankind.
Still you keep o' the windy side of the law.
Out of my lean and low ability I 'll lend you something.
Thus the whirligig of time brings in his revenges.
What 's gone and what 's past help Should be past grief.
A merry heart goes all the day, Your sad tires in a mile-a.
I love a ballad in print o' life, for then we are sure they are true.
Lord of thy presence and no land beside.
For he is but a bastard to the time That doth not smack of observation.
Sweet, sweet, sweet poison for the age's tooth.
Talks as familiarly of roaring lions As maids of thirteen do of puppy-dogs!
Here I and sorrows sit; Here is my throne, bid kings come bow to it.
That no Italian priest Shall tithe or toll in our dominions.
Life is as tedious as a twice-told tale Vexing the dull ear of a drowsy man.
When Fortune means to men most good, She looks upon them with a threatening eye.
And oftentimes excusing of a fault Doth make the fault the worse by the excuse.
How oft the sight of means to do ill deeds Make deeds ill done!
Mocking the air with colours idly spread.
This England never did, nor never shall, Lie at the proud foot of a conqueror.
Old John of Gaunt, time-honoured Lancaster.
The daintiest last, to make the end most sweet.
The tongues of dying men Enforce attention like deep harmony.
Evermore thanks, the exchequer of the poor.
Fires the proud tops of the eastern pines.
O, call back yesterday, bid time return!
Let 's talk of graves, of worms, and epitaphs.
He is come to open The purple testament of bleeding war.
As for a camel To thread the postern of a small needle's eye.
Diana's foresters, gentlemen of the shade, minions of the moon.
Thou hast damnable iteration, and art indeed able to corrupt a saint.
And now am I, if a man should speak truly, little better than one of the wicked.
'T is my vocation, Hal; 't is no sin for a man to labour in his vocation.
There 's neither honesty, manhood, nor good fellowship in thee.
If all the year were playing holidays, To sport would be as tedious as to work.
The blood more stirs To rouse a lion than to start a hare!
If the rascal have not given me medicines to make me love him, I 'll be hanged.
It would be argument for a week, laughter for a month, and a good jest for ever.
Falstaff sweats to death, And lards the lean earth as he walks along.
Out of this nettle, danger, we pluck this flower, safety.
A Corinthian, a lad of mettle, a good boy.
Call you that backing of your friends? A plague upon such backing!
Three misbegotten knaves in Kendal green.
Mark now, how a plain tale shall put you down.
No more of that, Hal, an thou lovest me!
What doth gravity out of his bed at midnight?
A plague of sighing and grief! It blows a man up like a bladder.
Banish plump Jack, and banish all the world.
O, monstrous! but one half-pennyworth of bread to this intolerable deal of sack!
Diseased Nature oftentimes breaks forth In strange eruptions.
While you live, tell truth and shame the devil!
But in the way of bargain, mark ye me, I 'll cavil on the ninth part of a hair.
Company, villanous company, hath been the spoil of me.
This sickness doth infect The very life-blood of our enterprise.
That daffed the world aside, And bid it pass.
The cankers of a calm world and a long peace.
Food for powder, food for powder; they 'll fill a pit as well as better.
I would 't were bedtime, Hal, and all well.
Two stars keep not their motion in one sphere.
This earth that bears thee dead Bears not alive so stout a gentleman.
Thy ignominy sleep with thee in the grave, But not remember'd in thy epitaph!
I could have better spared a better man.
The better part of valour is discretion.
Full bravely hast thou fleshed Thy maiden sword.
I 'll purge, and leave sack, and live cleanly.
I am not only witty in myself, but the cause that wit is in other men.
Some smack of age in you, some relish of the saltness of time.
For my voice, I have lost it with halloing and singing of anthems.
If I do, fillip me with a three-man beetle.
Who lined himself with hope, Eating the air on promise of supply.
An habitation giddy and unsure Hath he that buildeth on the vulgar heart.
Past and to come seems best; things present worst.
I do now remember the poor creature, small beer.
He was indeed the glass Wherein the noble youth did dress themselves.
Uneasy lies the head that wears a crown.
We are ready to try our fortunes To the last man.
He hath a tear for pity, and a hand Open as day for melting charity.
Thy wish was father, Harry, to that thought.
Commit The oldest sins the newest kind of ways.
A joint of mutton, and any pretty little tiny kickshaws, tell William cook.
A foutre for the world and worldlings base! I speak of Africa and golden joys.
Under which king, Bezonian? speak, or die!
O for a Muse of fire, that would ascend The brightest heaven of invention!
Consideration, like an angel, came And whipped the offending Adam out of him.
His nose was as sharp as a pen, and a' babbled of green fields.
Self-love, my liege, is not so vile a sin As self-neglecting.
And sheathed their swords for lack of argument.
I see you stand like greyhounds in the slips, Straining upon the start.
I would give all my fame for a pot of ale and safety.
I thought upon one pair of English legs Did march three Frenchmen.
Every subject's duty is the king's; but every subject's soul is his own.
That 's a perilous shot out of an elder-gun.
Winding up days with toil and nights with sleep.
But if it be a sin to covet honour, I am the most offending soul alive.
We few, we happy few, we band of brothers.
An arrant traitor as any is in the universal world, or in France, or in England!
There is occasions and causes why and wherefore in all things.
By this leek, I will most horribly revenge: I eat and eat, I swear.
Hung be the heavens with black, yield day to night!
Smooth runs the water where the brook is deep.
Close up his eyes and draw the curtain close; And let us all to meditation.
The gaudy, blabbing, and remorseful day Is crept into the bosom of the sea.
The smallest worm will turn, being trodden on.
Warwick, peace, Proud setter up and puller down of kings!
To leave this keen encounter of our wits.
Was ever woman in this humour wooed? Was ever woman in this humour won?
The world is grown so bad, That wrens make prey where eagles dare not perch.
So wise so young, they say, do never live long.
Lives like a drunken sailor on a mast, Ready with every nod to tumble down.
Thou troublest me; I am not in the vein.
Their lips were four red roses on a stalk.
The sons of Edward sleep in Abraham's bosom.
Let not the heavens hear these tell-tale women Rail on the Lord's anointed.
An honest tale speeds best, being plainly told.
Thus far into the bowels of the land Have we marched on without impediment.
Give me another horse: bind up my wounds.
O coward conscience, how dost thou afflict me!
The early village cock Hath twice done salutation to the morn.
The selfsame heaven That frowns on me looks sadly upon him.
A horse! a horse! my kingdom for a horse!
No man's pie is freed From his ambitious finger.
Heat not a furnace for your foe so hot That it do singe yourself.
'T is but the fate of place, and the rough brake That virtue must go through.
And then to breakfast with What appetite you have.
A peace above all earthly dignities, A still and quiet conscience.
I charge thee, fling away ambition: By that sin fell the angels.
So may he rest; his faults lie gently on him!
Men's evil manners live in brass; their virtues We write in water.
Yet in bestowing, madam, He was most princely.
To dance attendance on their lordships' pleasures.
You were ever good at sudden commendations.
I come not To hear such flattery now, and in my presence.
They are too thin and bare to hide offences.
Those about her From her shall read the perfect ways of honour.
The baby figure of the giant mass Of things to come.
The common curse of mankind,--folly and ignorance.
Welcome ever smiles, And farewell goes out sighing.
One touch of nature makes the whole world kin.
And give to dust that is a little gilt More laud than gilt o'er-dusted.
And like a dew-drop from the lion's mane, Be shook to air.
The end crowns all, And that old common arbitrator, Time, Will one day end it.
Nature teaches beasts to know their friends.
A cup of hot wine with not a drop of allaying Tiber in 't.
I thank you for your voices: thank you: Your most sweet voices.
Hear you this Triton of the minnows? Mark you His absolute "shall"?
That it shall hold companionship in peace With honour, as in war.
_Serv._ Where dwellest thou? _Cor._ Under the canopy.
A name unmusical to the Volscians' ears, And harsh in sound to thine.
An hour before the worshipp'd sun Peered forth the golden window of the east.
One fire burns out another's burning, One pain is lessen'd by another's anguish.
For I am proverb'd with a grandsire phrase.
For you and I are past our dancing days.
Too early seen unknown, and known too late!
O Romeo, Romeo! wherefore art thou Romeo?
Alack, there lies more peril in thine eye Than twenty of their swords.
At lovers' perjuries, They say, Jove laughs.
Too like the lightning, which doth cease to be Ere one can say, "It lightens."
Thy old groans ring yet in my ancient ears.
These violent delights have violent ends.
Thy head is as full of quarrels as an egg is full of meat.
Thou cutt'st my head off with a golden axe.
Straining harsh discords and unpleasing sharps.
All these woes shall serve For sweet discourses in our time to come.
Thank me no thanks, nor proud me no prouds.
Not stepping o'er the bounds of modesty.
My bosom's lord sits lightly in his throne.
I do remember an apothecary, And hereabouts he dwells.
Meagre were his looks, Sharp misery had worn him to the bones.
The world is not thy friend nor the world's law.
One writ with me in sour misfortune's book.
Her beauty makes This vault a feasting presence full of light.
Eyes, look your last! Arms, take your last embrace!
But flies an eagle flight, bold and forth on, Leaving no tract behind.
Men shut their doors against a setting sun.
Every room Hath blazed with lights and bray'd with minstrelsy.
Every man has his fault, and honesty is his.
As proper men as ever trod upon neat's leather.
But, for my own part, it was Greek to me.
With an angry wafture of your hand, Gave sign for me to leave you.
Think you I am no stronger than my sex, Being so father'd and so husbanded?
These things are beyond all use, And I do fear them.
The choice and master spirits of this age.
Cry "Havoc," and let slip the dogs of war.
Who is here so base that would be a bondman?
If any, speak; for him have I offended. I pause for a reply.
For Brutus is an honourable man; So are they all, all honourable men.
O judgment! thou art fled to brutish beasts, And men have lost their reason.
If you have tears, prepare to shed them now.
What private griefs they have, alas, I know not.
You yourself Are much condemn'd to have an itching palm.
I had rather be a dog, and bay the moon, Than such a Roman.
I said, an elder soldier, not a better: Did I say "better"?
All his faults observed, Set in a note-book, learn'd, and conn'd by rote.
We must take the current when it serves, Or lose our ventures.
The deep of night is crept upon our talk, And nature must obey necessity.
But for your words, they rob the Hybla bees, And leave them honeyless.
O, that a man might know The end of this day's business ere it come!
The last of all the Romans, fare thee well!
Sleep shall neither night nor day Hang upon his pent-house lid.
Stands not within the prospect of belief.
The earth hath bubbles as the water has, And these are of them.
The insane root That takes the reason prisoner.
If chance will have me king, why, chance may crown me.
Come what come may, Time and the hour runs through the roughest day.
There 's no art To find the mind's construction in the face.
More is thy due than more than all can pay.
Yet do I fear thy nature; It is too full o' the milk of human kindness.
That no compunctious visitings of nature Shake my fell purpose.
I have bought Golden opinions from all sorts of people.
Letting "I dare not" wait upon "I would," Like the poor cat i' the adage.
I dare do all that may become a man; Who dares do more is none.
There 's husbandry in heaven; Their candles are all out.
Thou marshall'st me the way that I was going.
Now o'er the one half-world Nature seems dead.
The attempt and not the deed Confounds us.
I had most need of blessing, and "Amen" Stuck in my throat.
'T is the eye of childhood That fears a painted devil.
Dire combustion and confused events New hatch'd to the woful time.
Tongue nor heart Cannot conceive nor name thee!
The wine of life is drawn, and the mere lees Is left this vault to brag of.
Who can be wise, amazed, temperate and furious, Loyal and neutral, in a moment?
Thriftless ambition, that wilt ravin up Thine own life's means!
I must become a borrower of the night For a dark hour or twain.
Let every man be master of his time Till seven at night.
_Mur._         We are men, my liege. _Mac._ Ay, in the catalogue ye go for men.
Things without all remedy Should be without regard; what 's done is done.
We have scotch'd the snake, not kill'd it.
Be innocent of the knowledge, dearest chuck, Till thou applaud the deed.
Things bad begun make strong themselves by ill.
Now spurs the lated traveller apace To gain the timely inn.
But now I am cabin'd, cribb'd, confined, bound in To saucy doubts and fears.
Now, good digestion wait on appetite, And health on both!
Thou canst not say I did it; never shake Thy gory locks at me.
I drink to the general joy o' the whole table.
Thou hast no speculation in those eyes Which thou dost glare with!
A thing of custom,--'t is no other; Only it spoils the pleasure of the time.
Hence, horrible shadow! Unreal mockery, hence!
Stand not upon the order of your going, But go at once.
My little spirit, see, Sits in a foggy cloud, and stays for me.
Double, double toil and trouble; Fire burn, and cauldron bubble.
Eye of newt and toe of frog, Wool of bat and tongue of dog.
How now, you secret, black, and midnight hags!
I 'll make assurance double sure, And take a bond of fate.
Show his eyes, and grieve his heart; Come like shadows, so depart!
What, will the line stretch out to the crack of doom?
I 'll charm the air to give a sound, While you perform your antic round.
The flighty purpose never is o'ertook, Unless the deed go with it.
When our actions do not, Our fears do make us traitors.
Angels are bright still, though the brightest fell.
What, all my pretty chickens and their dam At one fell swoop?
I cannot but remember such things were, That were most precious to me.
O, I could play the woman with mine eyes And braggart with my tongue.
The night is long that never finds the day.
Fie, my lord, fie! a soldier, and afeard?
Yet who would have thought the old man to have had so much blood in him?
All the perfumes of Arabia will not sweeten this little hand.
Till Birnam wood remove to Dunsinane, I cannot taint with fear.
I would applaud thee to the very echo, That should applaud again.
Blow, wind! come, wrack! At least we 'll die with harness on our back.
Those clamorous harbingers of blood and death.
Live to be the show and gaze o' the time.
Lay on, Macduff, And damn'd be him that first cries, "Hold, enough!"
For this relief much thanks: 't is bitter cold, And I am sick at heart.
Whose sore task Does not divide the Sunday from the week.
This sweaty haste Doth make the night joint-labourer with the day.
And then it started like a guilty thing Upon a fearful summons.
The head is not more native to the heart.
A little more than kin, and less than kind.
All that lives must die, Passing through nature to eternity.
A beast, that wants discourse of reason.
My father's brother, but no more like my father Than I to Hercules.
He was a man, take him for all in all, I shall not look upon his like again.
In the dead vast and middle of the night.
A countenance more in sorrow than in anger.
While one with moderate haste might tell a hundred.
Let it be tenable in your silence still.
Gave it an understanding, but no tongue.
Upon the platform, 'twixt eleven and twelve.
Foul deeds will rise, Though all the earth o'erwhelm them, to men's eyes.
When the blood burns, how prodigal the soul Lends the tongue vows.
Be somewhat scanter of your maiden presence.
Unhand me, gentlemen. By heaven, I 'll make a ghost of him that lets me!
Something is rotten in the state of Denmark.
Every man has business and desire, Such as it is.
Art thou there, truepenny? Come on--you hear this fellow in the cellarage.
O day and night, but this is wondrous strange!
The time is out of joint: O cursed spite, That ever I was born to set it right!
The flash and outbreak of a fiery mind, A savageness in unreclaimed blood.
That he is mad, 't is true: 't is true 't is pity; And pity 't is 't is true.
To be honest as this world goes, is to be one man picked out of ten thousand.
_Pol._ What do you read, my lord? _Ham._ Words, words, words.
Though this be madness, yet there is method in 't.
On fortune's cap we are not the very button.
There is nothing either good or bad, but thinking makes it so.
Beggar that I am, I am even poor in thanks.
Man delights not me: no, nor woman neither.
There is something in this more than natural, if philosophy could find it out.
O Jephthah, judge of Israel, what a treasure hadst thou!
One fair daughter and no more, The which he loved passing well.
The play, I remember, pleased not the million; 't was caviare to the general.
Use every man after his desert, and who should 'scape whipping?
What 's Hecuba to him, or he to Hecuba, That he should weep for her?
Unpack my heart with words, And fall a-cursing, like a very drab.
For murder, though it have no tongue, will speak With most miraculous organ.
The devil hath power To assume a pleasing shape.
The play 's the thing Wherein I 'll catch the conscience of the king.
With devotion's visage And pious action we do sugar o'er The devil himself.
Nymph, in thy orisons Be all my sins remember'd.
Rich gifts wax poor when givers prove unkind.
O, woe is me, To have seen what I have seen, see what I see!
To hold, as 't were, the mirror up to nature.
The very age and body of the time his form and pressure.
Though it make the unskilful laugh, cannot but make the judicious grieve.
Horatio, thou art e'en as just a man As e'er my conversation coped withal.
A man that fortune's buffets and rewards Hast ta'en with equal thanks.
And my imaginations are as foul As Vulcan's stithy.
Nay, then, let the devil wear black, for I 'll have a suit of sables.
There 's hope a great man's memory may outlive his life half a year.
For, O, for, O, the hobby-horse is forgot.
This is miching mallecho; it means mischief.
Our wills and fates do so contrary run That our devices still are overthrown.
The lady doth protest[138-1] too much, methinks.
Let the galled jade wince, our withers are unwrung.
The story is extant, and writ in choice Italian.
Do you think I am easier to be played on than a pipe?
I will speak daggers to her, but use none.
With all his crimes broad blown, as flush as May.
About some act That has no relish of salvation in 't.
And let me wring your heart; for so I shall, If it be made of penetrable stuff.
Such an act That blurs the grace and blush of modesty.
What act That roars so loud, and thunders in the index?
At your age The hey-day in the blood is tame, it 's humble.
Conceit in weakest bodies strongest works.
How is 't with you, That you do bend your eye on vacancy?
Confess yourself to heaven; Repent what 's past; avoid what is to come.
I must be cruel, only to be kind: Thus bad begins, and worse remains behind.
For 't is the sport to have the enginer Hoist with his own petar.
Diseases desperate grown By desperate appliance are relieved, Or not at all.
So full of artless jealousy is guilt, It spills itself in fearing to be spilt.
We know what we are, but know not what we may be.
To-morrow is Saint Valentine's day, All in the morning betime.
Then up he rose, and donn'd his clothes.
Come, my coach! Good night, sweet ladies; good night.
When sorrows come, they come not single spies, But in battalions.
His beard was as white as snow, All flaxen was his poll.
That we would do, We should do when we would.
One woe doth tread upon another's heel, So fast they follow.
Nature her custom holds, Let shame say what it will.
There is no ancient gentlemen but gardeners.
Has this fellow no feeling of his business?
Custom hath made it in him a property of easiness.
The hand of little employment hath the daintier sense.
A politician, . . . one that would circumvent God.
One that was a woman, sir; but, rest her soul, she 's dead.
'T were to consider too curiously, to consider so.
Lay her i' the earth: And from her fair and unpolluted flesh May violets spring!
Though I am not splenitive and rash, Yet have I something in me dangerous.
Nay, an thou 'lt mouth, I 'll rant as well as thou.
Let Hercules himself do what he may, The cat will mew and dog will have his day.
There 's a divinity that shapes our ends, Rough-hew them how we will.
I once did hold it, as our statists do, A baseness to write fair.
The bravery of his grief did put me Into a towering passion.
What imports the nomination of this gentleman?
'T is the breathing time of day with me.
I have shot mine arrow o'er the house, And hurt my brother.
This fell sergeant, death, Is strict in his arrest.
Mend your speech a little, Lest it may mar your fortunes.
I want that glib and oily art, To speak and purpose not.
A still-soliciting eye, and such a tongue As I am glad I have not.
Time shall unfold what plaited cunning hides.
As if we were villains by necessity; fools by heavenly compulsion.
How sharper than a serpent's tooth it is To have a thankless child!
Striving to better, oft we mar what 's well.
Hysterica passio, down, thou climbing sorrow, Thy element 's below.
Nature in you stands on the very verge Of her confine.
Let not women's weapons, water-drops, Stain my man's cheeks!
Blow, winds, and crack your cheeks! rage! blow!
I tax not you, you elements, with unkindness.
A poor, infirm, weak, and despised old man.
There was never yet fair woman but she made mouths in a glass.
I am a man More sinn'd against than sinning.
Oh, that way madness lies; let me shun that.
Take physic, pomp; Expose thyself to feel what wretches feel.
I 'll talk a word with this same learned Theban.
The little dogs and all, Tray, Blanch, and Sweetheart, see, they bark at me.
I am tied to the stake, and I must stand the course.
The lowest and most dejected thing of fortune.
The worst is not So long as we can say, "This is the worst."
Patience and sorrow strove Who should express her goodliest.
Give me an ounce of civet, good apothecary, to sweeten my imagination.
Through tatter'd clothes small vices do appear; Robes and furr'd gowns hide all.
Upon such sacrifices, my Cordelia, The gods themselves throw incense.
The gods are just, and of our pleasant vices Make instruments to plague us.
Her voice was ever soft, Gentle, and low,--an excellent thing in woman.
That never set a squadron in the field, Nor the division of a battle knows.
We cannot all be masters, nor all masters Cannot be truly follow'd.
I will wear my heart upon my sleeve For daws to peck at.
You are one of those that will not serve God, if the devil bid you.
The wealthy curled darlings of our nation.
The robb'd that smiles, steals something from the thief.
One that excels the quirks of blazoning pens.
I am not merry; but I do beguile The thing I am, by seeming otherwise.
You may relish him more in the soldier than in the scholar.
I have very poor and unhappy brains for drinking.
Silence that dreadful bell: it frights the isle From her propriety.
Your name is great In mouths of wisest censure.
Thy honesty and love doth mince this matter.
Cassio, I love thee; But never more be officer of mine.
_Iago._ What, are you hurt, lieutenant? _Cas._ Ay, past all surgery.
O God, that men should put an enemy in their mouths to steal away their brains!
How poor are they that have not patience!
Poor and content is rich and rich enough.
To be once in doubt Is once to be resolv'd.
I swear 't is better to be much abused Than but to know 't a little.
Be sure of it; give me the ocular proof.
Take note, take note, O world, To be direct and honest is not safe.
Swell, bosom, with thy fraught, For 't is of aspics' tongues!
To beguile many, and be beguil'd by one.
But yet the pity of it, Iago! O Iago, the pity of it, Iago!
I understand a fury in your words, But not the words.
Patience, thou young and rose-lipp'd cherubin.
This is the night That either makes me or fordoes me quite.
Had all his hairs been lives, my great revenge Had stomach for them all.
Curse his better angel from his side, And fall to reprobation.
Man but a rush against Othello's breast, And he retires.
I took by the throat the circumcised dog, And smote him, thus.
There 's beggary in the love that can be reckon'd.
On the sudden A Roman thought hath struck him.
My salad days, When I was green in judgment.
Epicurean cooks Sharpen with cloyless sauce his appetite.
Age cannot wither her, nor custom stale Her infinite variety.
I have not kept my square; but that to come Shall all be done by the rule.
Come, thou monarch of the vine, Plumpy Bacchus with pink eyne!
To business that we love we rise betime, And go to 't with delight.
O, wither'd is the garland of the war, The soldier's pole is fallen.
Let 's do it after the high Roman fashion.
If there be, or ever were, one such, It 's past the size of dreaming.
Mechanic slaves With greasy aprons, rules, and hammers.
Lest the bargain should catch cold and starve.
How bravely thou becomest thy bed, fresh lily.
The most patient man in loss, the most coldest that ever turned up ace.
Prouder than rustling in unpaid-for silk.
So slippery that The fear 's as bad as falling.
It is no act of common passage, but A strain of rareness.
Thou art all the comfort The gods will diet me with.
Weariness Can snore upon the flint, when resty sloth Finds the down pillow hard.
An angel! or, if not, An earthly paragon!
Triumphs for nothing and lamenting toys Is jollity for apes and grief for boys.
And put My clouted brogues from off my feet.
Golden lads and girls all must, As chimney-sweepers, come to dust.
Bid me discourse, I will enchant thine ear.
The grass stoops not, she treads on it so light.
For greatest scandal waits on greatest state.
Full many a glorious morning have I seen.
Like stones of worth, they thinly placed are, Or captain jewels in the carcanet.
And simple truth miscall'd simplicity, And captive good attending captain ill.
The ornament of beauty is suspect, A crow that flies in heaven's sweetest air.
Farewell! thou art too dear for my possessing.
Still constant is a wondrous excellence.
My nature is subdu'd To what it works in, like the dyer's hand.
No, I am that I am, and they that level At my abuses reckon up their own.
Bad in the best, though excellent in neither.
Crabbed age and youth Cannot live together.
Have you not heard it said full oft, A woman's nay doth stand for naught?
No pleasure is comparable to the standing upon the vantage-ground of truth.
Chiefly the mould of a man's fortune is in his own hands.
Virtue is like a rich stone,--best plain set.
Reading maketh a full man, conference a ready man, and writing an exact man.
Books must follow sciences, and not sciences books.
Knowledge is power.--Nam et ipsa scientia potestas est.
For the glory of the Creator and the relief of man's estate.
The sun, which passeth through pollutions and itself remains as pure as before.
Cleanness of body was ever deemed to proceed from a due reverence to God.
The world 's a bubble, and the life of man Less than a span.
Cato said the best way to keep good acts in memory was to refresh them with new.
A little too wise, they say, do ne'er live long.
'T is slight, not strength, that gives the greatest lift.
From thousands of our undone widows One may derive some wit.
Ground not upon dreams; you know they are ever contrary.
Have you summoned your wits from wool-gathering?
From the crown of our head to the sole of our foot.
That disease Of which all old men sicken,--avarice.
Beat all your feathers as flat down as pancakes.
Let the air strike our tune, Whilst we show reverence to yond peeping moon.
As old Chaucer was wont to say, that broad famous English poet.
The world 's a stage on which all parts are played.
How many honest words have suffered corruption since Chaucer's days!
Lord of himself, though not of lands; And having nothing, yet hath all.
I am but a gatherer and disposer of other men's stuff.
Hanging was the worst use a man could be put to.
An ambassador is an honest man sent to lie abroad for the commonwealth.
The itch of disputing will prove the scab of churches.
Who are a little wise the best fools be.
Get money; still get money, boy, No matter by what means.
Have paid scot and lot there any time this eighteen years.
Still to be neat, still to be drest, As you were going to a feast.
The world knows only two,--that 's Rome and I.
Preserving the sweetness of proportion and expressing itself beyond expression.
Courses even with the sun Doth her mighty brother run.
For a good poet 's made as well as born.
What gentle ghost, besprent with April dew, Hails me so solemnly to yonder yew?
I know death hath ten thousand several doors For men to take their exit.
I saw him now going the way of all flesh.
I was ne'er so thrummed since I was a gentleman.
We are ne'er like angels till our passion dies.
To add to golden numbers golden numbers.
Moderation is the silken string running through the pearl chain of all virtues.
Death borders upon our birth, and our cradle stands in the grave.
Man is his own star; and that soul that can Be honest is the only perfect man.
I find the medicine worse than the malady.
Fountain heads and pathless groves, Places which pale passion loves.
Drink to-day, and drown all sorrow; You shall perhaps not do 't to-morrow.
And he that will to bed go sober Falls with the leaf still in October.
I would help others, out of a fellow-feeling.
They lard their lean books with the fat of others' works.
It is most true, _stylus virum arguit_,--our style bewrays us.
I had not time to lick it into form, as a bear doth her young ones.
Like the watermen that row one way and look another.
Smile with an intent to do mischief, or cozen him whom he salutes.
Him that makes shoes go barefoot himself.
Carcasses bleed at the sight of the murderer.
Cookery is become an art, a noble science; cooks are gentlemen.
No rule is so general, which admits not some exception.
Why doth one man's yawning make another yawn?
A nightingale dies for shame if another bird sings better.
[The rich] are indeed rather possessed by their money than possessors.
A mere madness, to live like a wretch and die rich.
They are proud in humility; proud in that they are not proud.
Aristotle said melancholy men of all others are most witty.
Fabricius finds certain spots and clouds in the sun.
Machiavel says virtue and riches seldom settle on one man.
Set a beggar on horseback and he will ride a gallop.
Who cannot give good counsel? 'T is cheap, it costs them nothing.
Many things happen between the cup and the lip.
All places are distant from heaven alike.
Birds of a feather will gather together.
And hold one another's noses to the grindstone hard.
Every man for himself, his own ends, the Devil for all.
He is only fantastical that is not in fashion.
Marriage and hanging go by destiny; matches are made in heaven.
Diogenes struck the father when the son swore.
Though it rain daggers with their points downward.
The miller sees not all the water that goes by his mill.
As clear and as manifest as the nose in a man's face.
Where God hath a temple, the Devil will have a chapel.
If the world will be gulled, let it be gulled.
For "ignorance is the mother of devotion," as all the world knows.
The fear of some divine and supreme powers keeps men in obedience.
The Devil himself, which is the author of confusion and lies.
When they are at Rome, they do there as they see done.
They have cheveril consciences that will stretch.
Death hath a thousand doors to let out life.
I hold he loves me best that calls me Tom.
'T is not the drinking that is to be blamed, but the excess.
Few men make themselves masters of the things they write or speak.
Thou little thinkest what a little foolery governs the world.
They that govern the most make the least noise.
Wise men say nothing in dangerous times.
Here are sands, ignoble things, Dropt from the ruined sides of kings.
It is always good When a man has two irons in the fire.
All your better deeds Shall be in water writ, but this in marble.
Upon my burned body lie lightly, gentle earth.
But they that are above Have ends in everything.
It shew'd discretion, the best part of valour.
There is a method in man's wickedness, It grows up by degrees.
From the crown of the head to the sole of the foot.
The fit 's upon me now! Come quickly, gentle lady; The fit 's upon me now.
Death hath so many doors to let out life.
Of all the paths [that] lead to a woman's love Pity 's the straightest.
Thou wilt scarce be a man before thy mother.
What 's one man's poison, signor, Is another's meat or drink.
Primrose, first-born child of Ver, Merry springtime's harbinger.
Hang sorrow! care will kill a cat, And therefore let 's be merry.
Though I am young, I scorn to flit On the wings of borrowed wit.
And I oft have heard defended, Little said is soonest mended.
And he that gives us in these days New Lords may give us new laws.
Then fly betimes, for only they Conquer Love that run away.
Whose life is a bubble, and in length a span.
A sweet disorder in the dress Kindles in clothes a wantonness.
Thus woe succeeds a woe, as wave a wave.
I saw a flie within a beade Of amber cleanly buried.
Out-did the meat, out-did the frolick wine.
Death aims with fouler spite At fairer marks.
The next way home 's the farthest way about.
To write a verse or two is all the praise That I can raise.
Sweet day, so cool, so calm, so bright, The bridal of the earth and sky.
Sweet spring, full of sweet days and roses, A box where sweets compacted lie.
Only a sweet and virtuous soul, Like seasoned timber, never gives.
Like summer friends, Flies of estate and sunneshine.
A verse may find him who a sermon flies, And turn delight into a sacrifice.
Chase brave employment with a naked sword Throughout the world.
Sundays observe; think when the bells do chime, 'T is angels' music.
Bibles laid open, millions of surprises.
Religion stands on tiptoe in our land, Ready to pass to the American strand.
Man is one world, and hath Another to attend him.
If goodness lead him not, yet weariness May toss him to my breast.
Wouldst thou both eat thy cake and have it?
Do well and right, and let the world sink.
Hell is full of good meanings and wishings.
No sooner is a temple built to God, but the Devil builds a chapel hard by.
It is a poor sport that is not worth the candle.
To a close-shorn sheep God gives wind by measure.
The lion is not so fierce as they paint him.
The mouse that hath but one hole is quickly taken.
A dwarf on a giant's shoulders sees farther of the two.
As no man is born an artist, so no man is born an angler.
Angling is somewhat like poetry,--men are to be born so.
Good company and good discourse are the very sinews of virtue.
Old-fashioned poetry, but choicely good.
This dish of meat is too good for any but anglers, or very honest men.
But God, who is able to prevail, wrestled with him; marked him for his own.
The great secretary of Nature,--Sir Francis Bacon.
Only the actions of the just Smell sweet and blossom in the dust.
Death calls ye to the crowd of common men.
And pulpit, drum ecclesiastick, Was beat with fist instead of a stick.
We grant, although he had much wit, He was very shy of using it.
He could distinguish and divide A hair 'twixt south and southwest side.
For rhetoric, he could not ope His mouth, but out there flew a trope.
For all a rhetorician's rules Teach nothing but to name his tools.
A Babylonish dialect Which learned pedants much affect.
For he by geometric scale Could take the size of pots of ale.
And wisely tell what hour o' the day The clock does strike, by algebra.
Whatever sceptic could inquire for, For every why he had a wherefore.
Where entity and quiddity, The ghosts of defunct bodies, fly.
He knew what 's what,[210-3] and that 's as high As metaphysic wit can fly.
Such as take lodgings in a head That 's to be let unfurnished.
And prove their doctrine orthodox, By apostolic blows and knocks.
As if religion was intended For nothing else but to be mended.
Compound for sins they are inclined to, By damning those they have no mind to.
He ne'er consider'd it, as loth To look a gift-horse in the mouth.
And force them, though it was in spite Of Nature and their stars, to write.
Quoth Hudibras, "I smell a rat! Ralpho, thou dost prevaricate."
With many a stiff thwack, many a bang, Hard crab-tree and old iron rang.
Like feather bed betwixt a wall And heavy brunt of cannon ball.
Ay me! what perils do environ The man that meddles with cold iron!
Who thought he 'd won The field as certain as a gun.
Nor do I know what is become Of him, more than the Pope of Rome.
I 'll make the fur Fly 'bout the ears of the old cur.
He had got a hurt O' the inside, of a deadlier sort.
While the honour thou hast got Is spick and span new.
With mortal crisis doth portend My days to appropinque an end.
For those that run away and fly, Take place at least o' the enemy.
I am not now in fortune's power: He that is down can fall no lower.
Cheer'd up himself with ends of verse And sayings of philosophers.
When pious frauds and holy shifts Are dispensations and gifts.
Friend Ralph, thou hast Outrun the constable[212-3] at last.
No Indian prince has to his palace More followers than a thief to the gallows.
Quoth she, I 've heard old cunning stagers Say fools for arguments use wagers.
Love in your hearts as idly burns As fire in antique Roman urns.
For what is worth in anything But so much money as 't will bring?
Love is a boy by poets styl'd; Then spare the rod and spoil the child.
Have always been at daggers-drawing, And one another clapper-clawing.
For truth is precious and divine, Too rich a pearl for carnal swine.
Why should not conscience have vacation As well as other courts o' th' nation?
Doubtless the pleasure is as great Of being cheated as to cheat.
He made an instrument to know If the moon shine at full or no.
Each window like a pill'ry appears, With heads thrust thro' nail'd by the ears.
There 's but the twinkling of a star Between a man of peace and war.
As men of inward light are wont To turn their optics in upon 't.
Still amorous and fond and billing, Like Philip and Mary on a shilling.
Nick Machiavel had ne'er a trick, Though he gave his name to our Old Nick.
True as the dial to the sun, Although it be not shin'd upon.
But still his tongue ran on, the less Of weight it bore, with greater ease.
For those that fly may fight again, Which he can never do that 's slain.
He that complies against his will Is of his own opinion still.
The assembled souls of all that men held wise.
Since knowledge is but sorrow's spy, It is not safe to know.
There is no road or ready way to virtue.
Man is a noble animal, splendid in ashes and pompous in the grave.
Quietly rested under the drums and tramplings of three conquests.
The yielding marble of her snowy breast.
Poets that lasting marble seek Must come in Latin or in Greek.
How small a part of time they share That are so wondrous sweet and fair!
Illustrious acts high raptures do infuse, And every conqueror creates a muse.
Could we forbear dispute and practise love, We should agree as angels do above.
She commandeth her husband, in any equal matter, by constant obeying him.
He knows little who will tell his wife all he knows.
Learning hath gained most by those books by which the printers have lost.
Fame sometimes hath created something of nothing.
Often the cockloft is empty in those whom Nature hath built many stories high.
Things unattempted yet in prose or rhyme.
Yet from those flames No light, but rather darkness visible.
Where peace And rest can never dwell, hope never comes That comes to all.
To be weak is miserable, Doing or suffering.
And out of good still to find means of evil.
Farewell happy fields, Where joy forever dwells: hail, horrors!
Heard so oft In worst extremes, and on the perilous edge Of battle.
Spirits when they please Can either sex assume, or both.
Who overcomes By force, hath overcome but half his foe.
Anon out of the earth a fabric huge Rose, like an exhalation.
Surer to prosper than prosperity Could have assur'd us.
Rather than be less, Car'd not to be at all.
When the scourge Inexorable and the torturing hour Call us to penance.
Our torments also may in length of time Become our elements.
Long is the way And hard, that out of hell leads up to light.
Their rising all at once was as the sound Of thunder heard remote.
The low'ring element Scowls o'er the darken'd landscape.
Arm th' obdur'd breast With stubborn patience as with triple steel.
Whence and what art thou, execrable shape?
Back to thy punishment, False fugitive, and to thy speed add wings.
Their fatal hands No second stroke intend.
Before mine eyes in opposition sits Grim Death, my son and foe.
Death Grinn'd horrible a ghastly smile, to hear His famine should be fill'd.
Into this wild abyss, The womb of Nature and perhaps her grave.
With ruin upon ruin, rout on rout, Confusion worse confounded.
So he with difficulty and labour hard Mov'd on, with difficulty and labour he.
Hail holy light! offspring of heav'n first-born.
The rising world of waters dark and deep.
Thoughts that voluntary move Harmonious numbers.
See golden days, fruitful of golden deeds, With joy and love triumphing.
Since call'd The Paradise of Fools, to few unknown.
At whose sight all the stars Hide their diminish'd heads.
Ease would recant Vows made in pain, as violent and void.
Sabean odours from the spicy shore Of Araby the Blest.
Flowers of all hue, and without thorn the rose.
Proserpine gathering flowers, Herself a fairer flower.
And with necessity, The tyrant's plea,[232-2] excus'd his devilish deeds.
As Jupiter On Juno smiles, when he impregns the clouds That shed May flowers.
In naked beauty more adorn'd, More lovely than Pandora.
Eas'd the putting off These troublesome disguises which we wear.
Hail wedded love, mysterious law, true source Of human offspring.
Squat like a toad, close at the ear of Eve.
Not to know me argues yourselves unknown, The lowest of your throng.
Fled Murmuring, and with him fled the shades of night.
My latest found, Heaven's last, best gift, my ever new delight!
Good, the more Communicated, more abundant grows.
These are thy glorious works, Parent of good!
Nor jealousy Was understood, the injur'd lover's hell.
Thrones, Dominations, Princedoms, Virtues, Powers.
They eat, they drink, and in communion sweet Quaff immortality and joy.
Satan; so call him now, his former name Is heard no more in heaven.
Midnight brought on the dusky hour Friendliest to sleep and silence.
Morn, Wak'd by the circling hours, with rosy hand Unbarr'd the gates of light.
Servant of God, well done; well hast thou fought The better fight.
Still govern thou my song, Urania, and fit audience find, though few.
Now half appear'd The tawny lion, pawing to get free His hinder parts.
And grace that won who saw to wish her stay.
And touch'd by her fair tendance, gladlier grew.
With centric and eccentric scribbled o'er, Cycle and epicycle, orb in orb.
Be lowly wise: Think only what concerns thee and thy being.
To know That which before us lies in daily life Is the prime wisdom.
Among unequals what society Can sort, what harmony, or true delight?
Accuse not Nature: she hath done her part; Do thou but thine.
With a smile that glow'd Celestial rosy red, love's proper hue.
Pleas'd me, long choosing and beginning late.
Unless an age too late, or cold Climate, or years, damp my intended wing.
Revenge, at first though sweet, Bitter ere long back on itself recoils.
The work under our labour grows, Luxurious by restraint.
Smiles from reason flow, To brute deny'd, and are of love the food.
For solitude sometimes is best society, And short retirement urges sweet return.
Hope elevates, and joy Brightens his crest.
Left that command Sole daughter of his voice.
In her face excuse Came prologue, and apology too prompt.
A pillar'd shade High overarch'd, and echoing walks between.
Then purg'd with euphrasy and rue The visual nerve, for he had much to see.
Moping melancholy And moon-struck madness.
So may'st thou live, till like ripe fruit thou drop Into thy mother's lap.
Beauty stands In the admiration only of weak minds Led captive.
Rocks whereon greatest men have oftest wreck'd.
Of whom to be disprais'd were no small praise.
Syene, and where the shadow both way falls, Meroe, Nilotic isle.
Dusk faces with white silken turbans wreath'd.
The childhood shows the man, As morning shows the day.
Athens, the eye of Greece, mother of arts And eloquence.
Socrates . . . Whom well inspir'd the oracle pronounc'd Wisest of men.
Deep vers'd in books, and shallow in himself.
Till morning fair Came forth with pilgrim steps in amice gray.
What boots it at one gate to make defence, And at another to let in the foe?
For evil news rides post, while good news baits.
Above the smoke and stir of this dim spot Which men call earth.
That golden key That opes the palace of eternity.
These my sky-robes spun out of Iris' woof.
Midnight shout and revelry, Tipsy dance and jollity.
Was I deceiv'd, or did a sable cloud Turn forth her silver lining on the night?
Who, as they sung, would take the prison'd soul And lap it in Elysium.
It were a journey like the path to heaven, To help you find them.
With thy long levell'd rule of streaming light.
And sweeten'd every musk-rose of the dale.
Fill'd the air with barbarous dissonance.
That power Which erring men call Chance.
Enter'd the very lime-twigs of his spells, And yet came off.
This cordial julep here, That flames and dances in his crystal bounds.
And live like Nature's bastards, not her sons.
His rod revers'd, And backward mutters of dissevering power.
But now my task is smoothly done, I can fly, or I can run.
Or if Virtue feeble were, Heav'n itself would stoop to her.
He knew Himself to sing, and build the lofty rhyme.
Without the meed of some melodious tear.
And strictly meditate the thankless Muse.
Fame is no plant that grows on mortal soil.
To-morrow to fresh woods and pastures new.
And every shepherd tells his tale Under the hawthorn in the dale.
Herbs, and other country messes, Which the neat-handed Phillis dresses.
To many a youth and many a maid Dancing in the chequer'd shade.
Tower'd cities please us then, And the busy hum of men.
Ladies, whose bright eyes Rain influence, and judge the prize.
Untwisting all the chains that tie The hidden soul of harmony.
And looks commercing with the skies, Thy rapt soul sitting in thine eyes.
And add to these retired Leisure, That in trim gardens takes his pleasure.
Sweet bird, that shun'st the noise of folly, Most musical, most melancholy!
Where glowing embers through the room Teach light to counterfeit a gloom.
Far from all resort of mirth Save the cricket on the hearth.
Or call up him that left half told The story of Cambuscan bold.
And storied windows richly dight, Casting a dim religious light.
Till old experience do attain To something like prophetic strain.
Such sweet compulsion doth in music lie.
Under the shady roof Of branching elm star-proof.
Such as may make thee search the coffers round.
No war or battle's sound Was heard the world around.
Time will run back and fetch the age of gold.
Swinges the scaly horror of his folded tail.
Thy liquid notes that close the eye of day.
That would have made Quintilian stare and gasp.
Peace hath her victories No less renown'd than war.
What neat repast shall feast us, light and choice, Of Attic taste?
Of which all Europe rings from side to side.
Have hung My dank and dropping weeds To the stern god of sea.
Truth is as impossible to be soiled by any outward touch as the sunbeam.
His words, like so many nimble and airy servitors, trip about him at command.
Litigious terms, fat contentions, and flowing fees.
Attic tragedies of stateliest and most regal argument.
Seasoned life of man preserved and stored up in books.
Who shall silence all the airs and madrigals that whisper softness in chambers?
I 'll make thee glorious by my pen, And famous by my sword.
Actions of the last age are like almanacs of the last year.
The conscious water saw its God and blushed.
Whoe'er she be, That not impossible she, That shall command my heart and me.
Where'er she lie, Locked up from mortal eye, In shady leaves of destiny.
A happy soul, that all the way To heaven hath a summer's day.
I could not love thee, dear, so much, Lov'd I not honour more.
When flowing cups pass swiftly round With no allaying Thames.
Fishes that tipple in the deep, Know no such liberty.
What shall I do to be forever known, And make the age to come my own?
His time is forever, everywhere his place.
Hope, of all ills that men endure, The only cheap and universal cure.
Nothing is there to come, and nothing past, But an eternal now does always last.
The fairest garden in her looks, And in her mind the wisest books.
God the first garden made, and the first city Cain.
Hence, ye profane! I hate ye all, Both the great vulgar and the small.
Charm'd with the foolish whistling of a name.
We griev'd, we sigh'd, we wept; we never blush'd before.
All the beauty of the world, 't is but skin deep.
They spare the rod, and spoyle the child.
Orange bright, Like golden lamps in a green night.
And all the way, to guide their chime, With falling oars they kept the time.
Annihilating all that 's made To a green thought in a green shade.
He nothing common did, or mean, Upon that memorable scene.
So much one man can do, That does both act and know.
To make a bank was a great plot of state; Invent a shovel, and be a magistrate.
But felt through all this fleshly dress Bright shoots of everlastingness.
Manus haec inimica tyrannis Ense petit placidam sub libertate quietem.
Men lived like fishes; the great ones devoured the small.
It is not necessary to light a candle to the sun.
Learn to read slow: all other graces Will follow in their proper places.
And heaven had wanted one immortal song.
Who think too little, and who talk too much.
So over violent, or over civil, That every man with him was God or Devil.
His tribe were God Almighty's gentlemen.
For every inch that is not fool is rogue.
For truth has such a face and such a mien, As to be lov'd needs only to be seen.
And kind as kings upon their coronation day.
And torture one poor word ten thousand ways.
Thus all below is strength, and all above is grace.
Wit will shine Through the harsh cadence of a rugged line.
O gracious God! how far have we Profan'd thy heavenly gift of poesy!
Her wit was more than man, her innocence a child.
He was exhal'd; his great Creator drew His spirit, as the sun the morning dew.
Rich the treasure, Sweet the pleasure, Sweet is pleasure after pain.
And, like another Helen, fir'd another Troy.
Could swell the soul to rage, or kindle soft desire.
He rais'd a mortal to the skies, She drew an angel down.
A very merry, dancing, drinking, Laughing, quaffing, and unthinking time.
For Art may err, but Nature cannot miss.
Old as I am, for ladies' love unfit, The power of beauty I remember yet.
When beauty fires the blood, how love exalts the mind!
She hugg'd the offender, and forgave the offence: Sex to the last.
And virtue, though in rags, will keep me warm.
Ill habits gather by unseen degrees, As brooks make rivers, rivers run to seas.
Men are but children of a larger growth.
Your ignorance is the mother of your devotion to me.
I am resolved to grow fat, and look young till forty.
Pains of love be sweeter far Than all other pleasures are.
His hair just grizzled, As in a green old age.
There is a pleasure sure In being mad which none but madmen know.
This is the porcelain clay of humankind.
A knock-down argument: 't is but a word and a blow.
Whistling to keep myself from being afraid.
Remember Milo's end, Wedged in that timber which he strove to rend.
And choose an author as you choose a friend.
Immodest words admit of no defence, For want of decency is want of sense.
My God, my Father, and my Friend, Do not forsake me at my end.
Let us consider the reason of the case. For nothing is law that is not reason.
And ever since the Conquest have been fools.
Let us embrace, and from this very moment, vow an eternal misery together.
Then he will talk--good gods! how he will talk!
When Greeks joined Greeks, then was the tug of war.
'T is beauty calls, and glory shows the way.
Man, false man, smiling, destructive man!
A man who could make so vile a pun would not scruple to pick a pocket.
They will not let my play run; and yet they steal my thunder.
Of the king's creation you may be; but he who makes a count ne'er made a man.
He rolls it under his tongue as a sweet morsel.
None so deaf as those that will not hear.
Hearkners, we say, seldom hear good of themselves.
None so blind as those that will not see.
Men of polite learning and a liberal education.
It is good news, worthy of all acceptation; and yet not too good to be true.
The fortuitous or casual concourse of atoms.
God save our gracious king! Long live our noble king! God save the king!
Aldeborontiphoscophornio! Where left you Chrononhotonthologos?
His cogitative faculties immersed In cogibundity of cogitation.
To thee, and gentle Rigdom Funnidos, Our gratulations flow in streams unbounded.
Of all the girls that are so smart, There 's none like pretty Sally.
From ignorance our comfort flows. The only wretched are the wise.
Odds life! must one swear to the truth of a song?
Be to her virtues very kind; Be to her faults a little blind.
That if weak women went astray, Their stars were more in fault than they.
And thought the nation ne'er would thrive Till all the whores were burnt alive.
They never taste who always drink; They always talk who never think.
That air and harmony of shape express, Fine by degrees, and beautifully less.
His noble negligences teach What others' toils despair to reach.
Abra was ready ere I called her name; And though I called another, Abra came.
For hope is but the dream of those that wake.
A Rechabite poor Will must live, And drink of Adam's ale.
Where Young must torture his invention To flatter knaves, or lose his pension.
Hobbes clearly proves that every creature Lives in a state of war by nature.
Libertas et natale solum: Fine words! I wonder where you stole 'em.
As boys do sparrows, with flinging salt upon their tails.
He made it a part of his religion never to say grace to his meat.
The two noblest things, which are sweetness and light.
Censure is the tax a man pays to the public for being eminent.
Not die here in a rage, like a poisoned rat in a hole.
Do you think I was born in a wood to be afraid of an owl?
I hate nobody: I am in charity with the world.
I won't quarrel with my bread and butter.
She 's no chicken; she 's on the wrong side of thirty, if she be a day.
She looks as if butter wou'dn't melt in her mouth.
If it had been a bear it would have bit you.
She wears her clothes as if they were thrown on with a pitchfork.
_Lord M._  What religion is he of? _Lord Sp._ Why, he is an Anythingarian.
He was a bold man that first eat an oyster.
That is as well said as if I had said it myself.
Fingers were made before forks, and hands before knives.
She has more goodness in her little finger than he has in his whole body.
Lord! I wonder what fool it was that first invented kissing.
They say a carpenter 's known by his chips.
I 'll give you leave to call me anything, if you don't call me "spade."
I have fed like a farmer: I shall grow as fat as a porpoise.
I know Sir John will go, though he was sure it would rain cats and dogs.
I thought you and he were hand-in-glove.
'T is happy for him that his father was before him.
There is none so blind as they that won't see.
She watches him as a cat would watch a mouse.
I shall be like that tree,--I shall die at the top.
Ferdinand Mendez Pinto was but a type of thee, thou liar of the first magnitude.
I came up stairs into the world, for I was born in a cellar.
Hannibal was a very pretty fellow in those days.
Defer not till to-morrow to be wise, To-morrow's sun to thee may never rise.
Now, by St. Paul, the work goes bravely on.
Off with his head! so much for Buckingham!
And the ripe harvest of the new-mown hay Gives it a sweet and wholesome odour.
With clink of hammers closing rivets up.
As good be out of the world as out of the fashion.
Old houses mended, Cost little less than new before they 're ended.
Will. Honeycomb calls these over-offended ladies the outrageously virtuous.
A day, an hour, of virtuous liberty Is worth a whole eternity in bondage.
Curse all his virtues! they 've undone his country.
What a pity is it That we can die but once to save our country!
Sweet are the slumbers of the virtuous man.
And those that paint them truest praise them most.
For ever singing as they shine, The hand that made us is divine.
Round-heads and wooden-shoes are standing jokes.
At length the morn and cold indifference came.
Is this that haughty gallant, gay Lothario?
A flower, when offered in the bud, Is no vain sacrifice.
And he that does one fault at first And lies to hide it, makes it two.
For Satan finds some mischief still For idle hands to do.
I have been there, and still would go; 'T is like a little heaven below.
Lord, in the morning thou shalt hear My voice ascending high.
Fly, like a youthful hart or roe, Over the hills where spices grow.
And while the lamp holds out to burn, The vilest sinner may return.
Strange that a harp of thousand strings Should keep in tune so long!
The tall, the wise, the reverend head Must lie as low as ours.
Anything but history, for history must be false.
The gratitude of place-expectants is a lively sense of future favours.
I believe they talked of me, for they laughed consumedly.
'T was for the good of my country that I should be abroad.
Still an angel appear to each lover beside, But still be a woman to you.
True as the needle to the pole, Or as the dial to the sun.
Tired nature's sweet restorer, balmy sleep!
The bell strikes one. We take no note of time But from its loss.
Poor pensioner on the bounties of an hour.
At thirty, man suspects himself a fool; Knows it at forty, and reforms his plan.
All men think all men mortal but themselves.
He mourns the dead who lives as they desire.
And what its worth, ask death-beds; they can tell.
Time flies, death urges, knells call, Heaven invites, Hell threatens.
Whose yesterdays look backwards with a smile.
Thoughts shut up want air, And spoil, like bales unopen'd to the sun.
How blessings brighten as they take their flight!
Man makes a death which Nature never made.
And feels a thousand deaths in fearing one.
Wishing, of all employments, is the worst.
Man wants but little, nor that little long.
A Christian is the highest style of man.
Men may live fools, but fools they cannot die.
By night an atheist half believes a God.
Like our shadows, Our wishes lengthen as our sun declines.
That life is long which answers life's great end.
Death loves a shining mark, a signal blow.
And all may do what has by man been done.
The man that blushes is not quite a brute.
Too low they build, who build beneath the stars.
To frown at pleasure, and to smile in pain.
Final Ruin fiercely drives Her ploughshare o'er creation.
None think the great unhappy but the great.
Be wise with speed; A fool at forty is a fool indeed.
And waste their music on the savage race.
The man that makes a character makes foes.
Accept a miracle instead of wit, See two dull lines with Stanhope's pencil writ.
There buds the promise of celestial worth.
Great let me call him, for he conquered me.
Souls made of fire, and children of the sun, With whom revenge is virtue.
And friend received with thumps upon the back.
Our youth we can have but to-day, We may always find time to grow old.
The sweetest garland to the sweetest maid.
Words are men's daughters, but God's sons are things.
Together let us beat this ample field, Try what the open, what the covert yield.
Say first, of God above or man below, What can we reason but from what we know?
'T is but a part we see, and not a whole.
But thinks, admitted to that equal sky, His faithful dog shall bear him company.
Why has not man a microscopic eye? For this plain reason,--man is not a fly.
Know then thyself, presume not God to scan; The proper study of mankind is man.
Fix'd like a plant on his peculiar spot, To draw nutrition, propagate, and rot.
Extremes in nature equal ends produce; In man they join to some mysterious use.
The enormous faith of many made for one.
The soul's calm sunshine and the heartfelt joy.
A wit 's a feather, and a chief a rod; An honest man 's the noblest work of God.
Never elated when one man 's oppress'd; Never dejected while another 's bless'd.
Thou wert my guide, philosopher, and friend.
See how the world its veterans rewards! A youth of frolics, an old age of cards.
Oh, blest with temper whose unclouded ray Can make to-morrow cheerful as to-day!
And mistress of herself though china fall.
But thousands die without or this or that, Die, and endow a college or a cat.
Extremes in Nature equal good produce; Extremes in man concur to general use.
Rise, honest muse! and sing The Man of Ross.
Ye little stars! hide your diminish'd rays.
In the worst inn's worst room, with mat half hung.
One science only will one genius fit: So vast is art, so narrow human wit.
Hills peep o'er hills, and Alps on Alps arise!
Most authors steal their works, or buy; Garth did not write his own Dispensary.
For fools rush in where angels fear to tread.
And all Arabia breathes from yonder box.
Charms strike the sight, but merit wins the soul.
E'en Sunday shines no Sabbath day to me.
Obliged by hunger and request of friends.
Destroy his fib or sophistry--in vain! The creature 's at his dirty work again.
"On wings of winds came flying all abroad."
Satire or sense, alas! can Sporus feel? Who breaks a butterfly upon a wheel?
Wit that can creep, and pride that licks the dust.
Satire 's my weapon, but I 'm too discreet To run amuck, and tilt at all I meet.
Bare the mean heart that lurks behind a star.
Give me again my hollow tree, A crust of bread, and liberty.
Do good by stealth, and blush to find it fame.
When the brisk minor pants for twenty-one.
He 's armed without that 's innocent within.
Authors, like coins, grow dear as they grow old.
The mob of gentlemen who wrote with ease.
One simile that solitary shines In the dry desert of a thousand lines.
Who says in verse what others say in prose.
There still remains to mortify a wit The many-headed monster of the pit.
Praise undeserv'd is scandal in disguise.
The vulgar boil, the learned roast, an egg.
Words that wise Bacon or brave Raleigh spoke.
Vain was the chief's the sage's pride! They had no poet, and they died.
Ye Gods! annihilate but space and time, And make two lovers happy.
Next o'er his books his eyes begin to roll, In pleasing memory of all he stole.
All crowd, who foremost shall be damn'd to fame.
A wit with dunces, and a dunce with wits.
How sweet an Ovid, Murray was our boast!
The right divine of kings to govern wrong.
Judicious drank, and greatly daring din'd.
And truths divine came mended from that tongue.
And love the offender, yet detest the offence.
He best can paint them who shall feel them most.
I am his Highness' dog at Kew; Pray tell me, sir, whose dog are you?
Thou great First Cause, least understood.
And binding Nature fast in fate, Left free the human will.
Happy the man whose wish and care A few paternal acres bound.
Vital spark of heavenly flame! Quit, O quit this mortal frame!
Hark! they whisper; angels say, Sister spirit, come away!
The glorious fault of angels and of gods.
And bear about the mockery of woe To midnight dances and the public show.
The saint sustain'd it, but the woman died.
Of manners gentle, of affections mild; In wit a man, simplicity a child.
The mouse that always trusts to one poor hole Can never be a mouse of any soul.
Who dared to love their country, and be poor.
Party is the madness of many for the gain of a few.
Words sweet as honey from his lips distill'd.
And unextinguish'd laughter shakes the skies.
Thick as autumnal leaves or driving sand.
She moves a goddess, and she looks a queen.
First in the fight and every graceful deed.
The first in banquets, but the last in fight.
Gods! How the son degenerates from the sire!
With all its beauteous honours on its head.
A wealthy priest, but rich without a fault.
He held his seat,--a friend to human race.
If yet not lost to all the sense of shame.
'T is man's to fight, but Heaven's to give success.
He from whose lips divine persuasion flows.
Aurora now, fair daughter of the dawn, Sprinkled with rosy light the dewy lawn.
Short is my date, but deathless my renown.
To labour is the lot of man below; And when Jove gave us life, he gave us woe.
He serves me most who serves his country best.
The rest were vulgar deaths, unknown to fame.
The life which others pay let us bestow, And give to fame what we to nature owe.
And seem to walk on wings, and tread in air.
The best of things beyond their measure cloy.
To hide their ignominious heads in Troy.
Heroes as great have died, and yet shall fall.
And for our country 't is a bliss to die.
Like strength is felt from hope and from despair.
Two friends, two bodies with one soul inspir'd.
The mildest manners, and the gentlest heart.
Where'er he mov'd, the goddess shone before.
'T is fortune gives us birth, But Jove alone endues the soul with worth.
Our business in the field of fight Is not to question, but to prove our might.
The bitter dregs of fortune's cup to drain.
Who dies in youth and vigour, dies the best.
This, this is misery! the last, the worst That man can feel.
Sinks my sad soul with sorrow to the grave.
Base wealth preferring to eternal praise.
The mildest manners with the bravest mind.
Fly, dotard, fly! With thy wise dreams and fables of the sky.
And what he greatly thought, he nobly dar'd.
Few sons attain the praise Of their great sires, and most their sires disgrace.
The long historian of my country's woes.
When now Aurora, daughter of the dawn, With rosy lustre purpled o'er the lawn.
These riches are possess'd, but not enjoy'd!
Mirror of constant faith, rever'd and mourn'd!
Wise to resolve, and patient to perform.
The leader, mingling with the vulgar host, Is in the common mass of matter lost.
O thou, whose certain eye foresees The fix'd events of fate's remote decrees.
The big round tear stands trembling in her eye.
Heaven hears and pities hapless men like me, For sacred ev'n to gods is misery.
The bank he press'd, and gently kiss'd the ground.
A decent boldness ever meets with friends.
Oh, pity human woe! 'T is what the happy to the unhappy owe.
Whose well-taught mind the present age surpast.
And every eye Gaz'd, as before some brother of the sky.
Nor can one word be chang'd but for a worse.
And unextinguish'd laughter shakes the sky.
Behold on wrong Swift vengeance waits; and art subdues the strong!
A gen'rous heart repairs a sland'rous tongue.
Earth sounds my wisdom and high heaven my fame.
Strong are her sons, though rocky are her shores.
Lotus, the name; divine, nectareous juice!
Rare gift! but oh what gift to fools avails!
Our fruitless labours mourn, And only rich in barren fame return.
And not a man appears to tell their fate.
Let him, oraculous, the end, the way, The turns of all thy future fate display.
Born but to banquet, and to drain the bowl.
Who ne'er knew salt, or heard the billows roar.
Heav'd on Olympus tott'ring Ossa stood; On Ossa, Pelion nods with all his wood.
The first in glory, as the first in place.
Soft as some song divine thy story flows.
What mighty woes To thy imperial race from woman rose!
And pines with thirst amidst a sea of waves.
Up the high hill he heaves a huge round stone.
There in the bright assemblies of the skies.
All, soon or late, are doom'd that path to tread.
And what so tedious as a twice-told tale.
His native home deep imag'd in his soul.
How prone to doubt, how cautious are the wise!
It never was our guise To slight the poor, or aught humane despise.
Far from gay cities and the ways of men.
For too much rest itself becomes a pain.
Discourse, the sweeter banquet of the mind.
For love deceives the best of womankind.
And would'st thou evil for his good repay?
Whatever day Makes man a slave, takes half his worth away.
In ev'ry sorrowing soul I pour'd delight, And poverty stood smiling in my sight.
The fool of fate,--thy manufacture, man.
Impatient straight to flesh his virgin sword.
And rest at last where souls unbodied dwell, In ever-flowing meads of Asphodel.
The ruins of himself! now worn away With age, yet still majestic in decay.
And o'er the past Oblivion stretch her wing.
Blessed is he who expects nothing, for he shall never be disappointed.
The fly that sips treacle is lost in the sweets.
Brother, brother! we are both in the wrong.
How happy could I be with either, Were t' other dear charmer away!
Adieu, she cried, and waved her lily hand.
Whence is thy learning? Hath thy toil O'er books consum'd the midnight oil?
Where yet was ever found a mother Who 'd give her booby for another?
Lest men suspect your tale untrue, Keep probability in view.
In ev'ry age and clime we see Two of a trade can never agree.
Is there no hope? the sick man said; The silent doctor shook his head.
While there is life there 's hope, he cried.
Those who in quarrels interpose Must often wipe a bloody nose.
And when a lady 's in the case, You know all other things give place.
From wine what sudden friendship springs!
Life is a jest, and all things show it; I thought so once, but now I know it.
And we meet, with champagne and a chicken, at last.
But the fruit that can fall without shaking Indeed is too mellow for me.
Take time enough: all other graces Will soon fill up their proper places.
Whatever is worth doing at all, is worth doing well.
Thus I steer my bark, and sail On even keel, with gentle gale.
Though pleased to see the dolphins play, I mind my compass and my way.
Of joys departed, Not to return, how painful the remembrance!
Come, gentle Spring! ethereal Mildness! come.
Base Envy withers at another's joy, And hates that excellence it cannot reach.
Amid the roses fierce Repentance rears Her snaky crest.
The meek-ey'd Morn appears, mother of dews.
But yonder comes the powerful king of day, Rejoicing in the east.
Ships dim-discover'd dropping from the clouds.
A lucky chance, that oft decides the fate Of mighty monarchs.
Who stemm'd the torrent of a downward age.
See, Winter comes to rule the varied year.
Cruel as death, and hungry as the grave.
There studious let me sit, And hold high converse with the mighty dead.
The kiss, snatch'd hasty from the sidelong maid.
Shade, unperceiv'd, so softening into shade.
Come then, expressive silence, muse His praise.
A bard here dwelt, more fat than bard beseems.
Health is the vital principle of bliss, And exercise, of health.
Ever charming, ever new, When will the landscape tire the view?
That execrable sum of all villanies commonly called a Slave Trade.
Certainly this is a duty, not a sin. "Cleanliness is indeed next to godliness."
I am always in haste, but never in a hurry.
Early to bed and early to rise, Makes a man healthy, wealthy, and wise.
Never leave that till to-morrow which you can do to-day.
He that goes a borrowing goes a sorrowing.
Vessels large may venture more, But little boats should keep near shore.
It is hard for an empty bag to stand upright.
Experience keeps a dear school, but fools will learn in no other.
We are a kind of posterity in respect to them.
There never was a good war or a bad peace.
You and I were long friends: you are now my enemy, and I am yours.
We must all hang together, or assuredly we shall all hang separately.
He has paid dear, very dear, for his whistle.
Hold the fleet angel fast until he bless thee.
Oh, the roast beef of England, And old England's roast beef!
Confidence is a plant of slow growth in an aged bosom.
We have a Calvinistic creed, a Popish liturgy, and an Arminian clergy.
Let observation with extensive view Survey mankind, from China to Peru.
An age that melts in unperceiv'd decay, And glides in modest innocence away.
Superfluous lags the veteran on the stage.
For patience, sov'reign o'er transmuted ill.
Studious to please, yet not ashamed to fail.
And panting Time toil'd after him in vain.
For we that live to please must please to live.
Officious, innocent, sincere, Of every friendless name the friend.
And sure th' Eternal Master found His single talent well employ'd.
Trade's proud empire hastes to swift decay.
A man used to vicissitudes is not easily dejected.
Few things are impossible to diligence and skill.
Knowledge is more than equivalent to force.
I live in the crowd of jollity, not so much to enjoy company as to shun myself.
Many things difficult to design prove easy to performance.
The first years of man must make provision for the last.
Example is always more efficacious than precept.
The endearing elegance of female friendship.
Words are men's daughters, but God's sons are things.
The trappings of a monarchy would set up an ordinary commonwealth.
He is no wise man that will quit a certainty for an uncertainty.
What is read twice is commonly better remembered than what is transcribed.
I am glad that he thanks God for anything.
Being in a ship is being in a jail, with the chance of being drowned.
It matters not how a man dies, but how he lives.
That fellow seems to me to possess but one idea, and that is a wrong one.
I am a great friend to public amusements; for they keep people from vice.
A cow is a very good animal in the field; but we turn her out of a garden.
Much may be made of a Scotchman if he be caught young.
A man may write at any time if he will set himself doggedly to it.
Attack is the reaction. I never think I have hit hard unless it rebounds.
A man will turn over half a library to make one book.
Patriotism is the last refuge of a scoundrel.
In lapidary inscriptions a man is not upon oath.
No man but a blockhead ever wrote except for money.
Questioning is not the mode of conversation among gentlemen.
All this [wealth] excludes but one evil,--poverty.
Employment, sir, and hardships prevent melancholy.
He was so generally civil that nobody thanked him for it.
The applause of a single human being is of great consequence.
The potentiality of growing rich beyond the dreams of avarice.
Classical quotation is the _parole_ of literary men all over the world.
I never have sought the world; the world was not to seek me.
He is not only dull himself, but the cause of dullness in others.
I have found you an argument; I am not obliged to find you an understanding.
Who drives fat oxen should himself be fat.
Blown about with every wind of criticism.
Abstinence is as easy to me as temperance would be difficult.
The limbs will quiver and move after the soul is gone.
This world, where much is to be done and little to be known.
Towering in the confidence of twenty-one.
Women, like princes, find few real friends.
How much the wife is dearer than the bride.
But from the hoop's bewitching round, Her very shoe has power to wound.
"They order," said I, "this matter better in France."
I pity the man who can travel from Dan to Beersheba and cry, "'T is all barren!"
Trust that man in nothing who has not a conscience in everything.
So sweetly she bade me adieu, I thought that she bade me return.
I have found out a gift for my fair; I have found where the wood-pigeons breed.
My banks they are furnish'd with bees, Whose murmur invites one to sleep.
For seldom shall she hear a tale So sad, so tender, and so true.
A little bench of heedless bishops here, And there a chancellor in embryo.
And coxcombs vanquish Berkeley by a grin.
What female heart can gold despise? What cat 's averse to fish?
They hear a voice in every wind, And snatch a fearful joy.
And moody madness laughing wild Amid severest woe.
From Helicon's harmonious springs A thousand rills their mazy progress take.
Or ope the sacred source of sympathetic tears.
Loose his beard, and hoary hair Stream'd like a meteor to the troubled air.
To high-born Hoel's harp, or soft Llewellyn's lay.
Visions of glory, spare my aching sight! Ye unborn ages, crowd not on my soul!
And truth severe, by fairy fiction drest.
While bright-eyed Science watches round.
Iron sleet of arrowy shower Hurtles in the darken'd air.
Each in his narrow cell forever laid, The rude forefathers of the hamlet sleep.
The breezy call of incense-breathing morn.
And many a holy text around she strews, That teach the rustic moralist to die.
Brushing with hasty steps the dews away, To meet the sun upon the upland lawn.
And weep the more, because I weep in vain.
Rich windows that exclude the light, And passages that lead to nothing.
The hues of bliss more brightly glow, Chastised by sabler tints of woe.
And hie him home, at evening's close, To sweet repast and calm repose.
Corrupted freemen are the worst of slaves.
Let others hail the rising sun: I bow to that whose course is run.
This scholar, rake, Christian, dupe, gamester, and poet.
Hearts of oak are our ships, Hearts of oak are our men.
Who dares this pair of boots displace, Must meet Bombastes face to face.
The world is a comedy to those that think, a tragedy to those who feel.
In numbers warmly pure and sweetly strong.
How sleep the brave who sink to rest By all their country's wishes bless'd!
When Music, heavenly maid, was young, While yet in early Greece she sung.
'T was sad by fits, by starts 't was wild.
O Music! sphere-descended maid, Friend of Pleasure, Wisdom's aid!
Too nicely Jonson knew the critic's part; Nature in him was almost lost in Art.
Not what we wish, but what we want, Oh, let thy grace supply!
Oft has it been my lot to mark A proud, conceited, talking spark.
Born in a cellar, and living in a garret.
Such and so various are the tastes of men.
Seeks painted trifles and fantastic toys, And eagerly pursues imaginary joys.
Thy fatal shafts unerring move, I bow before thine altar, Love!
Time whereof the memory of man runneth not to the contrary.
I 'll woo her as the lion wooes his brides.
A rude and boisterous captain of the sea.
Like Douglas conquer, or like Douglas die.
Above the vulgar flight of common souls.
The flowers of the forest are a' wide awae.
Remote, unfriended, melancholy, slow, Or by the lazy Scheld or wandering Po.
Some fleeting good, that mocks me with the view.
These little things are great to little man.
Creation's heir, the world, the world is mine!
Man seems the only growth that dwindles here.
But winter lingering chills the lap of May.
The land of scholars and the nurse of arms.
Laws grind the poor, and rich men rule the law.
Luke's iron crown, and Damien's bed of steel.
Sweet Auburn! loveliest village of the plain.
The bashful virgin's sidelong looks of love.
A man he was to all the country dear, And passing rich with forty pounds a year.
The twelve good rules, the royal game of goose.
O Luxury! thou curst by Heaven's decree!
His conduct still right, with his argument wrong.
As a wit, if not first, in the very first line.
Who pepper'd the highest was surest to please.
The best-humour'd man, with the worst-humour'd Muse.
The king himself has followed her When she has walk'd before.
The dog, to gain his private ends, Went mad, and bit the man.
The man recovered of the bite, The dog it was that died.
All his faults are such that one loves him still the better for them.
Measures, not men, have always been my mark.
I 'll be with you in the squeezing of a lemon.
Ask me no questions, and I 'll tell you no fibs.
I find you want me to furnish you with argument and intellect too.
Taught by that Power that pities me, I learn to pity them.
Man wants but little here below, Nor wants that little long.
The sigh that rends thy constant heart Shall break thy Edwin's too.
By the living jingo, she was all of a muck of sweat.
To what happy accident[402-4] is it that we owe so unexpected a visit?
The true use of speech is not so much to express our wants as to conceal them.
All human race, from China to Peru, Pleasure, howe'er disguis'd by art, pursue.
Every white will have its blacke, And every sweet its soure.
Late, late yestreen I saw the new moone, Wi' the auld moon in hir arme.
He that had neyther been kith nor kin Might have seen a full fayre sight.
A Robyn, Jolly Robyn, Tell me how thy leman does.
The blinded boy that shootes so trim, From heaven downe did hie.
"What is thy name, faire maid?" quoth he. "Penelophon, O King!" quoth she.
He that would not when he might, He shall not when he wolda.
We 'll shine in more substantial honours, And to be noble we 'll be good.
When Arthur first in court began, And was approved king.
There is, however, a limit at which forbearance ceases to be a virtue.
In such a strait the wisest may well be perplexed and the boldest staggered.
Of this stamp is the cant of, Not men, but measures.
The concessions of the weak are the concessions of fear.
My vigour relents,--I pardon something to the spirit of liberty.
I do not know the method of drawing up an indictment against a whole people.
That chastity of honour which felt a stain like a wound.
Vice itself lost half its evil by losing all its grossness.
Kings will be tyrants from policy, when subjects are rebels from principle.
The men of England,--the men, I mean, of light and leading in England.
You can never plan the future by the past.
The cold neutrality of an impartial judge.
All men that are ruined, are ruined on the side of their natural propensities.
Example is the school of mankind, and they will learn at no other.
Early and provident fear is the mother of safety.
There never was a bad man that had ability for good service.
The people never give up their liberties but under some delusion.
It has all the contortions of the sibyl without the inspiration.
He was not merely a chip of the old block, but the old block itself.
He mouths a sentence as curs mouth a bone.
Be England what she will, With all her faults she is my country still.
Is base in kind, and born to be a slave.
As if the world and they were hand and glove.
Happiness depends, as Nature shows, Less on exterior things than most suppose.
Elegant as simplicity, and warm As ecstasy.
Lights of the world, and stars of human race.
A fool must now and then be right by chance.
He would not, with a peremptory tone, Assert the nose upon his face his own.
A moral, sensible, and well-bred man Will not affront me,--and no other can.
I cannot talk with civet in the room, A fine puss-gentleman that 's all perfume.
Our wasted oil unprofitably burns, Like hidden lamps in old sepulchral urns.
That good diffused may more abundant grow.
A business with an income at its heels Furnishes always oil for its own wheels.
Absence of occupation is not rest, A mind quite vacant is a mind distress'd.
Built God a church, and laugh'd his word to scorn.
A kick that scarce would move a horse May kill a sound divine.
I am monarch of all I survey, My right there is none to dispute.
O Solitude! where are the charms That sages have seen in thy face?
'T is Providence alone secures In every change both mine and yours.
I shall not ask Jean Jacques Rousseau If birds confabulate or no.
That though on pleasure she was bent, She had a frugal mind.
United yet divided, twain at once: So sit two kings of Brentford on one throne.
Doing good, Disinterested good, is not our trade.
God made the country, and man made the town.
England, with all thy faults I love thee still, My country!
Presume to lay their hand upon the ark Of her magnificent and awful cause.
There is a pleasure in poetic pains Which only poets know.
Whoe'er was edified, themselves were not.
She that asks Her dear five hundred friends.
Domestic happiness, thou only bliss Of Paradise that has survived the fall!
Great contest follows, and much learned dust.
Who loves a garden loves a greenhouse too.
What is it but a map of busy life, Its fluctuations, and its vast concerns?
Gloriously drunk, obey the important call.
Silently as a dream the fabric rose, No sound of hammer or of saw was there.
But war 's a game which were their subjects wise Kings would not play at.
As dreadful as the Manichean god, Adored through fear, strong only to destroy.
He is the freeman whom the truth makes free.
Some to the fascination of a name Surrender judgment hoodwink'd.
And Satan trembles when he sees The weakest saint upon his knees.
Behind a frowning providence He hides a shining face.
The son of parents pass'd into the skies.
A worm is in the bud of youth, And at the root of age.
But strive still to be a man before your mother.
War its thousands slays, Peace its ten thousands.
Teach him how to live, And, oh still harder lesson! how to die.
To be prepared for war is one of the most effectual means of preserving peace.
When I forget my sovereign, may my God forget me.
Our cause is just, our union is perfect.
His very foot has music in 't As he comes up the stairs.
Ay, do despise me! I 'm the prouder for it; I like to be despised.
Old age comes on apace to ravage all the clime.
He thought as a sage, though he felt as a man.
And beauty immortal awakes from the tomb.
Revenge is profitable, gratitude is expensive.
Our sympathy is cold to the relation of distant misery.
The winds and waves are always on the side of the ablest navigators.
All that is human must retrograde if it do not advance.
I was never less alone than when by myself.
These are the times that try men's souls.
Care to our coffin adds a nail, no doubt, And every grin so merry draws one out.
A fellow in a market town, Most musical, cried razors up and down.
O give me the sweet shady side of Pall Mall!
Rock of Ages, cleft for me, Let me hide myself in thee.
A pampered menial drove me from the door.
The God who gave us life, gave us liberty at the same time.
We mutually pledge to each other our lives, our fortunes, and our sacred honour.
Error of opinion may be tolerated where reason is left free to combat it.
In the full tide of successful experiment.
Indeed, I tremble for my country when I reflect that God is just.
For though his body 's under hatches, His soul has gone aloft.
In men this blunder still you find, All think their little set mankind.
Small habits well pursued betimes May reach the dignity of crimes.
The elegant simplicity of the three per cents.
Than all Bocara's vaunted gold, Than all the gems of Samarcand.
Thou hast no sorrow in thy song, No winter in thy year.
But optics sharp it needs, I ween, To see what is not to be seen.
No man e'er felt the halter draw, With good opinion of the law.
Illiterate him, I say, quite from your memory.
'T is safest in matrimony to begin with a little aversion.
A circulating library in a town is as an evergreen tree of diabolical knowledge.
He is the very pine-apple of politeness!
As headstrong as an allegory on the banks of the Nile.
No caparisons, miss, if you please. Caparisons don't become a young woman.
You are not like Cerberus, three gentlemen at once, are you?
You 're our enemy; lead the way, and we 'll precede.
There 's nothing like being used to a thing.
Egad, I think the interpreter is the hardest to be understood of the two!
Sheer necessity,--the proper parent of an art so nearly allied to invention.
No scandal about Queen Elizabeth, I hope?
Certainly nothing is unnatural that is not physically impossible.
Where they _do_ agree on the stage, their unanimity is wonderful.
The Spanish fleet thou canst not see, because--it is not yet in sight!
Here is the whole set! a character dead at every word.
An unforgiving eye, and a damned disinheriting countenance.
Had I a heart for falsehood framed, I ne'er could injure you.
Conscience has no more to do with gallantry than it has with politics.
Such protection as vultures give to lambs.
A life spent worthily should be measured by a nobler line,--by deeds, not years.
Then rushed to meet the insulting foe; They took the spear, but left the shield.
In this fool's paradise he drank delight.
In idle wishes fools supinely stay; Be there a will, and wisdom finds a way.
Better to love amiss than nothing to have loved.
'T was good advice, and meant, my son, Be good.
To sigh, yet not recede; to grieve, yet not repent.
And took for truth the test of ridicule.
Time has touched me gently in his race, And left no odious furrows in my face.
England expects every man to do his duty.
When chill November's surly blast Made fields and forests bare.
Man's inhumanity to man Makes countless thousands mourn.
Gars auld claes look amaist as weel 's the new.
Beneath the milk-white thorn that scents the evening gale.
For a' that, and a' that, And twice as muckle 's a' that.
And like a passing thought, she fled In light away.
His locked, lettered, braw brass collar Showed him the gentleman and scholar.
And there began a lang digression About the lords o' the creation.
What 's done we partly may compute, But know not what 's resisted.
Stern Ruin's ploughshare drives elate Full on thy bloom.
Perhaps it may turn out a sang, Perhaps turn out a sermon.
An atheist's laugh 's a poor exchange For Deity offended!
And may you better reck the rede, Than ever did the adviser!
Oh whistle, and I 'll come to ye, my lad.
If naebody care for me, I 'll care for naebody.
We twa hae run about the braes, And pu'd the gowans fine.
But, oh! fell death's untimely frost That nipt my flower sae early.
Liberty 's in every blow! Let us do or die.
Contented wi' little, and cantie wi' mair.
The landlady and Tam grew gracious Wi' favours secret, sweet, and precious.
Kings may be blest, but Tam was glorious, O'er a' the ills o' life victorious.
That hour, o' night's black arch the keystane.
Inspiring, bold John Barleycorn, What dangers thou canst make us scorn!
As Tammie glow'red, amazed and curious, The mirth and fun grew fast and furious.
But to see her was to love her, Love but her, and love forever.
Chords that vibrate sweetest pleasure Thrill the deepest notes of woe.
The rank is but the guinea's stamp, The man 's the gowd for a' that.
'T is sweeter for thee despairing Than aught in the world beside,--Jessy!
It was a' for our rightfu' King We left fair Scotland's strand.
Now a' is done that men can do, And a' is done in vain.
Necessity is the argument of tyrants; it is the creed of slaves.
Loud roared the dreadful thunder, The rain a deluge showers.
As she lay, on that day, In the bay of Biscay, O!
On their own merits modest men are dumb.
And what 's impossible can't be, And never, never comes to pass.
Three stories high, long, dull, and old, As great lords' stories often are.
Like two single gentlemen rolled into one.
But when ill indeed, E'en dismissing the doctor don't always succeed.
Mynheer Vandunck, though he never was drunk, Sipped brandy and water gayly.
Rise with the lark, and with the lark to bed.
The good are better made by ill, As odours crushed are sweeter still.
To vanish in the chinks that Time has made.
The princeps copy, clad in blue and gold.
Now cheaply bought for thrice their weight in gold.
Approbation from Sir Hubert Stanley is praise indeed.
The frivolous work of polished idleness.
Our Federal Union: it must be preserved.
You are uneasy; you never sailed with _me_ before, I see.
Think of your forefathers! Think of your posterity!
This is the last of earth! I am content.
It requires a surgical operation to get a joke well into a Scotch understanding.
That knuckle-end of England,--that land of Calvin, oat-cakes, and sulphur.
We cultivate literature on a little oatmeal.
Avoid shame, but do not seek glory,--nothing so expensive as glory.
Looked as if she had walked straight out of the ark.
You find people ready enough to do the Samaritan, without the oil and twopence.
Ah, you flavour everything; you are the vanilla of society.
As the French say, there are three sexes,--men, women, and clergymen.
Daniel Webster struck me much like a steam-engine in trousers.
Serenely full, the epicure would say, Fate cannot harm me,--I have dined to-day.
Magnificent spectacle of human happiness.
A sudden thought strikes me,--let us swear an eternal friendship.
Nothing except a battle lost can be half so melancholy as a battle won.
There is no mistake; there has been no mistake; and there shall be no mistake.
Story! God bless you! I have none to tell, sir.
I give thee sixpence! I will see thee damned first.
I called the New World into existence to redress the balance of the Old.
No, here 's to the pilot that weathered the storm!
Oh, be wiser thou! Instructed that true knowledge leads to love.
Action is transitory,--a step, a blow; The motion of a muscle, this way or that.
In that sweet mood when pleasant thoughts Bring sad thoughts to the mind.
And 't is my faith, that every flower Enjoys the air it breathes.
Come forth into the light of things, Let Nature be your teacher.
Sensations sweet, Felt in the blood, and felt along the heart.
But hearing oftentimes The still, sad music of humanity.
Knowing that Nature never did betray The heart that loved her.
Men who can hear the Decalogue, and feel No self-reproach.
As in the eye of Nature he has lived, So in the eye of Nature let him die!
There 's something in a flying horse, There 's something in a huge balloon.
Full twenty times was Peter feared, For once that Peter was respected.
One of those heavenly days that cannot die.
May no rude hand deface it, And its forlorn _hic jacet!_
Sweet childish days, that were as long As twenty days are now.
As high as we have mounted in delight, In our dejection do we sink as low.
Choice word and measured phrase above the reach Of ordinary men.
The holy time is quiet as a nun Breathless with adoration.
One that would peep and botanize Upon his mother's grave.
He murmurs near the running brooks A music sweeter than their own.
And you must love him, ere to you He will seem worthy of your love.
The harvest of a quiet eye, That broods and sleeps on his own heart.
A happy youth, and their old age Is beautiful and free.
The sweetest thing that ever grew Beside a human door.
A youth to whom was given So much of earth, so much of heaven.
Something between a hindrance and a help.
Lady of the Mere, Sole-sitting by the shores of old romance.
And he is oft the wisest man Who is not wise at all.
We meet thee, like a pleasant thought, When such are wanted.
The best of what we do and are, Just God, forgive!
For old, unhappy, far-off things, And battles long ago.
Some natural sorrow, loss, or pain That has been, and may be again.
The music in my heart I bore Long after it was heard no more.
A famous man is Robin Hood, The English ballad-singer's joy.
The Eagle, he was lord above, And Rob was lord below.
Every gift of noble origin Is breathed upon by Hope's perpetual breath.
Oh for a single hour of that Dundee Who on that day the word of onset gave!
O Cuckoo! shall I call thee bird, Or but a wandering voice?
That inward eye Which is the bliss of solitude.
A light to guide, a rod To check the erring, and reprove.
Shalt show us how divine a thing A woman may be made.
Bliss was it in that dawn to be alive, But to be young was very heaven!
The budding rose above the rose full blown.
There is One great society alone on earth: The noble living and the noble dead.
Whom neither shape of danger can dismay, Nor thought of tender happiness betray.
Sweetest melodies Are those that are by distance made more sweet.
The gentle Lady married to the Moor, And heavenly Una with her milk-white lamb.
The rainbow comes and goes, And lovely is the rose.
Where is it now, the glory and the dream?
At length the man perceives it die away, And fade into the light of common day.
The thought of our past years in me doth breed Perpetual benediction.
In years that bring the philosophic mind.
A few strong instincts, and a few plain rules.
The vision and the faculty divine; Yet wanting the accomplishment of verse.
The imperfect offices of prayer and praise.
That mighty orb of song, The divine Milton.
With battlements that on their restless fronts Bore stars.
Wisdom is ofttimes nearer when we stoop Than when we soar.
Wrongs unredressed, or insults unavenged.
Society became my glittering bride, And airy hopes my children.
Recognizes ever and anon The breeze of Nature stirring in his soul.
Pan himself, The simple shepherd's awe-inspiring god!
Spires whose "silent finger points to heaven."
A man he seems of cheerful yesterdays And confident to-morrows.
The gods approve The depth, and not the tumult, of the soul.
Elysian beauty, melancholy grace, Brought from a pensive though a happy place.
Turning, for them who pass, the common dust Of servile opportunity to gold.
Or shipwrecked, kindles on the coast False fires, that others may be lost.
But hushed be every thought that springs From out the bitterness of things.
To the solid ground Of Nature trusts the mind that builds for aye.
A Briton even in love should be A subject, not a slave!
Bright gem instinct with music, vocal spark.
The bosom-weight, your stubborn gift, That no philosophy can lift.
How fast has brother followed brother, From sunshine to the sunless land!
Minds that have nothing to confer Find little to perceive.
If thou would'st view fair Melrose aright, Go visit it by the pale moonlight.
O fading honours of the dead! O high ambition, lowly laid!
I cannot tell how the truth may be; I say the tale as 't was said to me.
Her blue eyes sought the west afar, For lovers love the western star.
Profan'd the God-given strength, and marr'd the lofty line.
When, musing on companions gone, We doubly feel ourselves alone.
When Prussia hurried to the field, And snatch'd the spear, but left the shield.
Where 's the coward that would not dare To fight for such a land?
With a smile on her lips and a tear in her eye.
But woe awaits a country when She sees the tears of bearded men.
And dar'st thou then To beard the lion in his den, The Douglas in his hall?
Oh what a tangled web we weave, When first we practise to deceive!
"Charge, Chester, charge! on, Stanley, on!" Were the last words of Marmion.
Oh for a blast of that dread horn On Fontarabian echoes borne!
To all, to each, a fair good-night, And pleasing dreams, and slumbers light.
In listening mood she seemed to stand, The guardian Naiad of the strand.
A foot more light, a step more true, Ne'er from the heath-flower dash'd the dew.
Sleep the sleep that knows not breaking, Morn of toil nor night of waking.
Hail to the chief who in triumph advances!
Some feelings are to mortals given With less of earth in them than heaven.
Come one, come all! this rock shall fly From its firm base as soon as I.
And the stern joy which warriors feel In foemen worthy of their steel.
In man's most dark extremity Oft succour dawns from Heaven.
No pale gradations quench his ray, No twilight dews his wrath allay.
It 's no fish ye 're buying, it 's men's lives.
My foot is on my native heath, and my name is MacGregor.
The happy combination of fortuitous circumstances.
Within that awful volume lies The mystery of mysteries!
And better had they ne'er been born, Who read to doubt, or read to scorn.
Woman's faith and woman's trust, Write the characters in dust.
But with the morning cool reflection came.
The sun never sets on the immense empire of Charles V.
When the good man yields his breath (For the good man never dies).
Distinct as the billows, yet one as the sea.
Once, in the flight of ages past, There lived a man.
Counts his sure gains, and hurries back for more.
Hope against hope, and ask till ye receive.
Joys too exquisite to last, And yet _more_ exquisite when past.
Nor sink those stars in empty night: They hide themselves in heaven's own light.
'T is not the whole of life to live, Nor all of death to die.
He holds him with his glittering eye, And listens like a three years' child.
We were the first that ever burst Into that silent sea.
As idle as a painted ship Upon a painted ocean.
Water, water, everywhere, Nor any drop to drink.
Without a breeze, without a tide, She steadies with upright keel.
And thou art long and lank and brown, As is the ribbed sea-sand.
Alone, alone,--all, all alone; Alone on a wide, wide sea.
A spring of love gush'd from my heart, And I bless'd them unaware.
Oh sleep! it is a gentle thing, Beloved from pole to pole.
So lonely 't was, that God himself Scarce seemed there to be.
He prayeth well who loveth well Both man and bird and beast.
He prayeth best who loveth best All things both great and small.
A sadder and a wiser man, He rose the morrow morn.
And the spring comes slowly up this way.
A lady richly clad as she, Beautiful exceedingly.
Carv'd with figures strange and sweet, All made out of the carver's brain.
Her gentle limbs did she undress, And lay down in her loveliness.
That saints will aid if men will call; For the blue sky bends over all!
Each matin bell, the Baron saith, Knells us back to a world of death.
For he on honey-dew hath fed, And drunk the milk of Paradise.
And the Devil did grin, for his darling sin Is pride that apes humility.
Hast thou a charm to stay the morning star In his steep course?
Risest from forth thy silent sea of pines.
Ye living flowers that skirt the eternal frost.
Earth with her thousand voices praises God.
Tranquillity! thou better name Than all the family of Fame.
The grand old ballad of Sir Patrick Spence.
A mother is a mother still, The holiest thing alive.
Never, believe me, Appear the Immortals, Never alone.
My eyes make pictures when they are shut.
I counted two-and-seventy stenches, All well defined, and several stinks.
I stood in unimaginable trance And agony that cannot be remembered.
Clothing the palpable and familiar With golden exhalations of the dawn.
Iago's soliloquy, the motive-hunting of a motiveless malignity--how awful it is!
The laws are with us, and God on our side.
So I told them in rhyme, For of rhymes I had store.
And so never ending, but always descending.
And this way the water comes down at Lodore.
Where Washington hath left His awful memory A light for after times!
The red-letter days now become, to all intents and purposes, dead-letter days.
A clear fire, a clean hearth, and the rigour of the game.
Gone before To that unknown and silent shore.
For thy sake, tobacco, I Would do anything but die.
And half had staggered that stout Stagirite.
He might have proved a useful adjunct, if not an ornament to society.
Martin, if dirt was trumps, what hands you would hold!
Lax in their gaiters, laxer in their gait.
My eyes! what tiles and chimney-pots About their heads are flying!
The Siren waits thee, singing song for song.
But Hope, the charmer, linger'd still behind.
O Heaven! he cried, my bleeding country save!
And rival all but Shakespeare's name below.
That gems the starry girdle of the year.
And rustic life and poverty Grow beautiful beneath his touch.
Whose lines are mottoes of the heart, Whose truths electrify the sage.
There was silence deep as death, And the boldest held his breath For a time.
The sentinel stars set their watch in the sky.
In life's morning march, when my bosom was young.
A stoic of the woods,--a man without a tear.
The torrent's smoothness, ere it dash below!
To live in hearts we leave behind Is not to die.
Oh leave this barren spot to me! Spare, woodman, spare the beechen tree!
Sir, I would rather be right than be President.
Weep on! and as thy sorrows flow, I 'll taste the luxury of woe.
Where bastard Freedom waves The fustian flag in mockery over slaves.
Faintly as tolls the evening chime, Our voices keep tune and our oars keep time.
A Persian's heaven is eas'ly made: 'T is but black eyes and lemonade.
Go where glory waits thee! But while fame elates thee, Oh, still remember me!
Who ran Through each mode of the lyre, and was master of all.
Good at a fight, but better at a play; Godlike in giving, but the devil to pay.
Though an angel should write, still 't is devils must print.
When did morning ever break, And find such beaming eyes awake?
The moon looks On many brooks "The brook can see no moon but this."
But there 's nothing half so sweet in life As love's young dream.
To live with them is far less sweet Than to remember thee.
'T is the last rose of summer, Left blooming alone.
My only books Were woman's looks, And folly 's all they 've taught me.
To live and die in scenes like this, With some we 've left behind us.
A friendship that like love is warm; A love like friendship, steady.
Oh call it by some better name, For friendship sounds too cold.
There 's a bower of roses by Bendemeer's stream.
One morn a Peri at the gate Of Eden stood disconsolate.
But the trail of the serpent is over them all.
As sunshine broken in the rill, Though turned astray, is sunshine still.
Love on through all ills, and love on till they die.
And oh if there be an Elysium on earth, It is this, it is this!
Humility, that low, sweet root From which all heavenly virtues shoot.
Pursuit of knowledge under difficulties. Death was now armed with a new terror.
Whatever makes men good Christians, makes them good citizens.
Let our object be our country, our whole country, and nothing but our country.
One country, one constitution, one destiny.
Justice, sir, is the great interest of man on earth.
Liberty exists in proportion to wholesome restraint.
The law: It has honored us; may we honor it.
Liberty and Union, now and forever, one and inseparable.
I was born an American; I will live an American; I shall die an American.
There is no refuge from confession but suicide; and suicide is confession.
There is nothing so powerful as truth,--and often nothing so strange.
Failed the bright promise of your early day.
By cool Siloam's shady rill How sweet the lily grows!
When Spring unlocks the flowers to paint the laughing soil.
Death rides on every passing breeze, He lurks in every flower.
Though every prospect pleases, And only man is vile.
I see them on their winding way, About their ranks the moonbeams play.
Free-livers on a small scale, who are prodigal within the compass of a guinea.
Write me as one who loves his fellow-men.
And lo! Ben Adhem's name led all the rest.
While the hollow oak our palace is, Our heritage the sea.
When looks were fond and words were few.
The sea! the sea! the open sea! The blue, the fresh, the ever free!
I never was on the dull, tame shore, But I loved the great sea more and more.
I only know we loved in vain; I only feel--farewell! farewell!
Fools are my theme, let satire be my song.
With just enough of learning to misquote.
Perverts the Prophets and purloins the Psalms.
Maid of Athens, ere we part, Give, oh give me back my heart!
Had sigh'd to many, though he loved but one.
If ancient tales say true, nor wrong these holy men.
Such partings break the heart they fondly hope to heal.
Might shake the saintship of an anchorite.
Adieu! adieu! my native shore Fades o'er the waters blue.
In hope to merit heaven by making earth a hell.
War, war is still the cry,--"war even to the knife!"
Gone, glimmering through the dream of things that were.
A schoolboy's tale, the wonder of an hour!
Dim with the mist of years, gray flits the shade of power.
The dome of thought, the palace of the soul.
Ah, happy years! once more who would not be a boy?
Coop'd in their winged, sea-girt citadel.
A thousand years scarce serve to form a state: An hour may lay it in the dust.
Where'er we tread, 't is haunted, holy ground.
Age shakes Athena's tower, but spares gray Marathon.
Ada! sole daughter of my house and heart.
He rush'd into the field, and foremost fighting fell.
Or whispering with white lips, "The foe! They come! they come!"
Grieving, if aught inanimate e'er grieves, Over the unreturning brave.
And thus the heart will break, yet brokenly live on.
All tenantless, save to the crannying wind.
The castled crag of Drachenfels Frowns o'er the wide and winding Rhine.
He had kept The whiteness of his soul, and thus men o'er him wept.
By the blue rushing of the arrowy Rhone.
This quiet sail is as a noiseless wing To waft me from distraction.
On the ear Drops the light drip of the suspended oar.
Exhausting thought, And hiving wisdom with each studious year.
Sapping a solemn creed with solemn sneer.
I have not loved the world, nor the world me.
I stood in Venice on the Bridge of Sighs, A palace and a prison on each hand.
Where Venice sate in state, throned on her hundred isles.
There are some feelings time cannot benumb, Nor torture shake.
Striking the electric chain wherewith we are darkly bound.
Italia! O Italia! thou who hast The fatal gift of beauty.
The hell of waters! where they howl and hiss, And boil in endless torture.
Then farewell Horace, whom I hated so, Not for thy faults, but mine.
Heaven gives its favourites--early death.
History, with all her volumes vast, Hath but one page.
Man! Thou pendulum betwixt a smile and tear.
Tully was not so eloquent as thou, Thou nameless column with the buried base.
Thou wert a beautiful thought, and softly bodied forth.
Alas! our young affections run to waste, Or water but the desert.
Thou glorious mirror, where the Almighty's form Glasses itself in tempests.
And what is writ is writ, Would it were worthier!
Hands promiscuously applied, Round the slight waist, or down the glowing side.
Shrine of the mighty! can it be That this is all remains of thee?
Better to sink beneath the shock Than moulder piecemeal on the rock.
The cold in clime are cold in blood, Their love can scarce deserve the name.
I die,--but first I have possess'd, And come what may, I _have been_ bless'd.
He makes a solitude, and calls it--peace!
The fatal facility of the octosyllabic verse.
Oh who can tell, save he whose heart hath tried.
The power of thought,--the magic of the mind!
There was a laughing devil in his sneer.
Hope withering fled, and Mercy sighed farewell!
No words suffice the secret soul to show, For truth denies all eloquence to woe.
Yet in my lineaments they trace Some features of my father's face.
Fare thee well! and if forever, Still forever fare thee well.
Born in the garret, in the kitchen bred.
When all of genius which can perish dies.
Who track the steps of glory to the grave.
And both were young, and one was beautiful.
She was his life, The ocean to the river of his thoughts, Which terminated all.
A change came o'er the spirit of my dream.
There 's not a joy the world can give like that it takes away.
I had a dream which was not all a dream.
So we 'll go no more a-roving So late into the night.
Which makes life itself a lie, Flattering dust with eternity.
I am the very slave of circumstance And impulse,--borne away with every breath!
Soprano, basso, even the contra-alto, Wished him five fathom under the Rialto.
Besides, they always smell of bread and butter.
That soft bastard Latin, Which melts like kisses from a female mouth.
O Mirth and Innocence! O milk and water! Ye happy mixtures of more happy days.
They never fail who die In a great cause.
Her stature tall,--I hate a dumpy woman.
And whispering, "I will ne'er consent,"--consented.
Man's love is of man's life a thing apart; 'T is woman's whole existence.
In my hot youth, when George the Third was king.
So for a good old-gentlemanly vice I think I must take up with avarice.
What is the end of fame? 'T is but to fill A certain portion of uncertain paper.
There 's nought, no doubt, so much the spirit calms As rum and true religion.
A solitary shriek, the bubbling cry Of some strong swimmer in his agony.
All who joy would win Must share it, happiness was born a twin.
A long, long kiss,--a kiss of youth and love.
Alas, the love of women! it is known To be a lovely and a fearful thing.
He was the mildest manner'd man That ever scuttled ship or cut a throat.
Ah, surely nothing dies but something mourns.
And if I laugh at any mortal thing, 'T is that I may not weep.
"Whom the gods love die young," was said of yore.
Perhaps the early grave Which men weep over may be meant to save.
And her face so fair Stirr'd with her dream, as rose-leaves with the air.
These two hated with a hate Found only on the stage.
"Arcades ambo,"--_id est_, blackguards both.
But all have prices, From crowns to kicks, according to their vices.
And puts himself upon his good behaviour.
Heroic, stoic Cato, the sententious, Who lent his lady to his friend Hortensius.
The drying up a single tear has more Of honest fame than shedding seas of gore.
What a strange thing is man! and what a stranger Is woman!
And wrinkles, the damned democrats, won't flatter.
And after all, what is a lie? 'T is but The truth in masquerade.
Of all tales 't is the saddest,--and more sad, Because it makes us smile.
'T is strange, but true; for truth is always strange, Stranger than fiction.
I awoke one morning and found myself famous.
The best of prophets of the future is the past.
What say you to such a supper with such a woman?
I dreamt that I dwelt in marble halls, With vassals and serfs at my side.
The light of other days[561-4] is faded, And all their glories past.
The heart bowed down by weight of woe To weakest hope will cling.
One of the few, the immortal names, That were not born to die.
But he lay like a warrior taking his rest, With his martial cloak around him.
And the cold marble leapt to life a god.
Too fair to worship, too divine to love.
Behold! in Liberty's unclouded blaze We lift our heads, a race of other days.
The awful shadow of some unseen Power Floats, tho' unseen, amongst us.
A pard-like spirit, beautiful and swift.
Life, like a dome of many-coloured glass, Stains the white radiance of eternity.
That orbed maiden with white fire laden, Whom mortals call the moon.
A lovely lady, garmented in light From her own beauty.
I love tranquil solitude And such society As is quiet, wise, and good.
How wonderful is Death! Death and his brother Sleep.
The trivial round, the common task, Would furnish all we ought to ask.
Alas for love, if thou wert all, And naught beyond, O Earth!
Calm on the bosom of thy God, Fair spirit, rest thee now!
Go forth under the open sky, and list To Nature's teachings.
The hills, Rock-ribbed, and ancient as the sun.
And sighs to find them in the wood and by the stream no more.
Music's golden tongue Flatter'd to tears this aged man and poor.
The silver snarling trumpets 'gan to chide.
Sudden a thought came like a full-blown rose, Flushing his brow.
A poor, weak, palsy-stricken, churchyard thing.
As though a rose should shut and be a bud again.
The days of peace and slumberous calm are fled.
Thou foster-child of Silence and slow Time.
Thou, silent form, doth tease us out of thought As doth eternity: Cold Pastoral!
Here lies one whose name was writ in water.
Literary men are . . . a perpetual priesthood.
Clever men are good, but they are not the best.
A poet without love were a physical and metaphysical impossibility.
Silence is deep as Eternity, speech is shallow as Time.
Literature is the Thought of thinking Souls.
Happy the people whose annals are blank in history-books.
The greatest of faults, I should say, is to be conscious of none.
The true University of these days is a Collection of Books.
One life,--a little gleam of time between two Eternities.
And we, with Nature's heart in tune, Concerted harmonies.
I 'd be a butterfly born in a bower, Where roses and lilies and violets meet.
Gayly the troubadour Touched his guitar.
Why don't the men propose, Mamma? Why don't the men propose?
She wore a wreath of roses The night that first we met.
Friends depart, and memory takes them To her caverns, pure and deep.
Tell me the tales that to me were so dear, Long, long ago, long, long ago.
The rose that all are praising Is not the rose for me.
Oh pilot, 't is a fearful night! There 's danger on the deep.
Fear not, but trust in Providence, Wherever thou may'st be.
Absence makes the heart grow fonder: Isle of Beauty, fare thee well!
Property has its duties as well as its rights.
Whilst twilight's curtain spreading far, Was pinned with a single star.
A baby was sleeping, Its mother was weeping.
Reproof on her lips, but a smile in her eye.
For drames always go by _conthraries_, my dear.
Sure the shovel and tongs To each other belongs.
Thus she stood amid the stooks, Praising God with sweetest looks.
When he is forsaken, Wither'd and shaken, What can an old man do but die?
And there is even a happiness That makes the heart afraid.
There 's not a string attuned to mirth But has its chord in melancholy.
But evil is wrought by want of thought, As well as want of heart.
Straight down the crooked lane, And all round the square.
For my part, getting up seems not so easy By half as _lying_.
A man that 's fond precociously of _stirring_ Must be a spoon.
Seem'd washing his hands with invisible soap In imperceptible water.
O bed! O bed! delicious bed! That heaven upon earth to the weary head!
Gold! Gold! Gold! Gold! Bright and yellow, hard and cold.
Another tumble! That 's his precious nose!
Sewing at once a double thread, A shroud as well as a shirt.
O God! that bread should be so dear, And flesh and blood so cheap!
No blessed leisure for love or hope, But only time for grief.
My tears must stop, for every drop Hinders needle and thread.
One more unfortunate Weary of breath, Rashly importunate, Gone to her death.
Alas for the rarity Of Christian charity Under the sun!
Even God's providence Seeming estrang'd.
Ever of thee I 'm fondly dreaming, Thy gentle voice my spirit can cheer.
Put your trust in God, my boys, and keep your powder dry.
He was a man Who stole the livery of the court of Heaven To serve the Devil in.
The tomb of him who would have made The world too glad and free.
A love that took an early root, And had an early doom.
Like ships, that sailed for sunny isles, But never came to shore.
The chief-justice was rich, quiet, and infamous.
How well Horatius kept the bridge In the brave days of old.
These be the great Twin Brethren To whom the Dorians pray.
Ye diners-out from whom we guard our spoons.
'T were vain to tell thee all I feel, Or say for thee I 'd die.
The world knows nothing of its greatest men.
An unreflected light did never yet Dazzle the vision feminine.
There is a higher law than the Constitution.
It is an irrepressible conflict between opposing and enduring forces.
Twelve years ago I was a boy, A happy boy at Drury's.
Some lie beneath the churchyard stone, And some before the speaker.
Near the lake where drooped the willow, Long time ago!
The surest way to hit a woman's heart is to take aim kneeling.
That fellow would vulgarize the day of judgment.
The best thing I know between France and England is the sea.
Some people are so fond of ill-luck that they run half-way to meet it.
A blessed companion is a book,--a book that fitly chosen is a life-long friend.
He was so good he would pour rose-water on a toad.
As for the brandy, "nothing extenuate;" and the water, put nought in in malice.
Talk to him of Jacob's ladder, and he would ask the number of the steps.
Not from a vain or shallow thought His awful Jove young Phidias brought.
Out from the heart of Nature rolled The burdens of the Bible old.
Earth proudly wears the Parthenon As the best gem upon her zone.
If eyes were made for seeing, Then Beauty is its own excuse for being.
Things are in the saddle, And ride mankind.
Heartily know, When half-gods go, The gods arrive.
The silent organ loudest chants The master's requiem.
And striving to be man, the worm Mounts through all the spires of form.
And every man, in love or pride, Of his fate is never wide.
None shall rule but the humble, And none but Toil shall have.
Oh, tenderly the haughty day Fills his blue urn with fire.
Go put your creed into your deed, Nor speak with double tongue.
Whoever fights, whoever falls, Justice conquers evermore.
Nor sequent centuries could hit Orbit and sum of Shakespeare's wit.
Nor mourn the unalterable Days That Genius goes and Folly stays.
Fear not, then, thou child infirm; There 's no god dare wrong a worm.
He thought it happier to be dead, To die for Beauty, than live for bread.
Wilt thou seal up the avenues of ill? Pay every debt, as if God wrote the bill?
Too busy with the crowded hour to fear to live or die.
For what avail the plough or sail, Or land or life, if freedom fail?
Time dissipates to shining ether the solid angularity of facts.
Nature is a mutable cloud which is always and never the same.
Discontent is the want of self-reliance: it is infirmity of will.
Every action is measured by the depth of the sentiment from which it proceeds.
A friend may well be reckoned the masterpiece of Nature.
Nothing great was ever achieved without enthusiasm.
He is great who is what he is from Nature, and who never reminds us of others.
The hearing ear is always found close to the speaking tongue.
I find the Englishman to be him of all men who stands firmest in his shoes.
A creative economy is the fuel of magnificence.
The manly part is to do with might and main what you can do.
Fine manners need the support of fine manners in others.
Good is a good doctor, but Bad is sometimes a better.
We do not count a man's years until he has nothing else to count.
Life is not so short but that there is always time enough for courtesy.
By necessity, by proclivity, and by delight, we all quote.
Next to the originator of a good sentence is the first quoter of it.
'T is always morning somewhere in the world.
My country is the world; my countrymen are mankind.
Our country is the world; our countrymen are mankind.
I will be as harsh as truth and as uncompromising as justice.
Our country is the world; our countrymen are all mankind.
Beneath the rule of men entirely great, The pen is mightier than the sword.
Take away the sword; States can be saved without it.
Buy my flowers,--oh buy, I pray! The blind girl comes from afar.
The man who smokes, thinks like a sage and acts like a Samaritan.
Free trade is not a principle, it is an expedient.
The noble lord[607-2] is the Rupert of debate.
A conservative government is an organized hypocrisy.
It is much easier to be critical than to be correct.
The characteristic of the present age is craving credulity.
Assassination has never changed the history of the world.
The secret of success is constancy to purpose.
Apologies only account for that which they do not alter.
Increased means and increased leisure are the two civilizers of man.
Patience is a necessary ingredient of genius.
Youth is a blunder; manhood a struggle; old age a regret.
Only think of Cockie Graves having gone and done it!
To be conscious that you are ignorant is a great step to knowledge.
Principle is ever my motto, not expediency.
Property has its duties as well as its rights.
Everything comes if a man will only wait.
That when a man fell into his anecdotage, it was a sign for him to retire.
You know who critics are?--the men who have failed in literature and art.
The world is a wheel, and it will all come round right.
The sweet simplicity of the three per cents.
Come o'er the moonlit sea, The waves are brightly glowing.
The morn was fair, the skies were clear, No breath came o'er the sea.
Meek and lowly, pure and holy, Chief among the "blessed three."
A word in season spoken May calm the troubled breast.
The bud is on the bough again, The leaf is on the tree.
I 'm sitting on the stile, Mary, Where we sat side by side.
Look, then, into thine heart, and write!
The hooded clouds, like friars, Tell their beads in drops of rain.
No tears Dim the sweet look that Nature wears.
For Time will teach thee soon the truth, There are no birds in last year's nest!
Into each life some rain must fall, Some days must be dark and dreary.
O thou child of many prayers! Life hath quicksands; life hath snares!
She floats upon the river of his thoughts.
The leaves of memory seemed to make A mournful rustling in the dark.
The air is full of farewells to the dying, And mournings for the dead.
But oftentimes celestial benedictions Assume this dark disguise.
What seem to us but sad, funereal tapers May be heaven's distant lamps.
Safe from temptation, safe from sin's pollution, She lives whom we call dead.
When she had passed, it seemed like the ceasing of exquisite music.
Blossomed the lovely stars, the forget-me-nots of the angels.
God had sifted three kingdoms to find the wheat for this planting.
Into a world unknown,--the corner-stone of a nation!
The surest pledge of a deathless name Is the silent homage of thoughts unspoken.
He has singed the beard of the king of Spain.
All things come round to him who will but wait.
Hold the fleet angel fast until he bless thee.
There is no greater sorrow Than to be mindful of the happy time In misery.
And step by step, since time began, I see the steady gain of man.
Low stir of leaves and dip of oars And lapsing waves on quiet shores.
The hope of all who suffer, The dread of all who wrong.
No more slave States; no slave Territories.
And Chaucer, with his infantine Familiar clasp of things divine.
Knowledge by suffering entereth, And life is perfected by death.
Oh, the little birds sang east, and the little birds sang west.
Thou large-brain'd woman and large-hearted man.
Death forerunneth Love to win "Sweetest eyes were ever seen."
But so fair, She takes the breath of men away Who gaze upon her unaware.
I believe this government cannot endure permanently half slave and half free.
We will now discuss in a little more detail the Struggle for Existence.
This laurel greener from the brows Of him that utter'd nothing base.
Broad based upon her people's will, And compassed by the inviolate sea.
For it was in the golden prime Of good Haroun Alraschid.
Dowered with the hate of hate, the scorn of scorn, The love of love.
Because right is right, to follow right Were wisdom in the scorn of consequence.
I built my soul a lordly pleasure-house, Wherein at ease for aye to dwell.
Her manners had not that repose Which stamps the caste of Vere de Vere.
A daughter of the gods, divinely tall, And most divinely fair.
More black than ash-buds in the front of March.
The long mechanic pacings to and fro, The set, gray life, and apathetic end.
With a little hoard of maxims preaching down a daughter's heart.
But the jingling of the guinea helps the hurt that Honour feels.
Men, my brothers, men the workers, ever reaping something new.
I will take some savage woman, she shall rear my dusky race.
I, the heir of all the ages, in the foremost files of time.
Let the great world spin forever down the ringing grooves of change.
Better fifty years of Europe than a cycle of Cathay.
We are ancients of the earth, And in the morning of the times.
But oh for the touch of a vanish'd hand, And the sound of a voice that is still!
But the tender grace of a day that is dead Will never come back to me.
For men may come and men may go, But I go on forever.
That tower of strength Which stood four-square to all the winds that blew.
All in the valley of death Rode the six hundred.
So dear a life your arms enfold, Whose crying is a cry for gold.
In that fierce light which beats upon a throne.
There sinks the nebulous star we call the sun.
Unto dying eyes The casement slowly grows a glimmering square.
Faultily faultless, icily regular, splendidly null.
That jewell'd mass of millinery, That oil'd and curl'd Assyrian Bull.
Gorgonized me from head to foot, With a stony British stare.
Queen rose of the rosebud garden of girls.
Never morning wore To evening, but some heart did break.
And topples round the dreary west A looming bastion fringed with fire.
And from his ashes may be made The violet of his native land.
I do but sing because I must, And pipe but as the linnets sing.
'T is better to have loved and lost Than never to have loved at all.
Whose faith has centre everywhere, Nor cares to fix itself to form.
Short swallow-flights of song, that dip Their wings in tears, and skim away.
Oh yet we trust that somehow good Will be the final goal of ill.
So careful of the type she seems, So careless of the single life.
The great world's altar-stairs, That slope through darkness up to God.
And grasps the skirts of happy chance, And breasts the blows of circumstance.
So many worlds, so much to do, So little done, such things to be.
There lives more faith in honest doubt, Believe me, than in half the creeds.
Ring out the old, ring in the new, Ring, happy bells, across the snow!
Ring out, ring out my mournful rhymes, But ring the fuller minstrel in!
Wearing all that weight Of learning lightly like a flower.
But on and up, where Nature's heart Beats strong amid the hills.
Great thoughts, great feelings came to them, Like instincts, unawares.
A man's best things are nearest him, Lie close about his feet.
The beating of my own heart Was all the sound I heard.
Like sentinel and nun, they keep Their vigil on the green.
Thou say'st an undisputed thing In such a solemn way.
Their discords sting through Burns and Moore, Like hedgehogs dressed in lace.
And since, I never dare to write As funny as I can.
Thine eye was on the censer, And not the hand that bore it.
O hearts that break and give no sign Save whitening lip and fading tresses!
A thought is often original, though you have uttered it a hundred times.
Sin has many tools, but a lie is the handle which fits them all.
Knowledge and timber should n't be much used till they are seasoned.
The hat is the _ultimum moriens_ of respectability.
A star for every State, and a State for every star.
There are no points of the compass on the chart of true patriotism.
It came upon the midnight clear, That glorious song of old.
A babe in a house is a well-spring of pleasure.
God, from a beautiful necessity, is Love.
Whom unmerciful disaster Followed fast and followed faster.
To the glory that was Greece And the grandeur that was Rome.
What the Puritans gave the world was not thought, but action.
Any nose May ravage with impunity a rose.
Be sure that God Ne'er dooms to waste the strength he deigns impart.
God is the perfect poet, Who in his person acts his own creations.
Progress is The law of life: man is not Man as yet.
God 's in his heaven: All 's right with the world.
Some unsuspected isle in the far seas, Some unsuspected isle in far-off seas.
In the morning of the world, When earth was nigher heaven than now.
There 's a woman like a dewdrop, she 's so purer than the purest.
When is man strong until he feels alone?
When the fight begins within himself, A man 's worth something.
The sprinkled isles, Lily on lily, that o'erlace the sea.
Other heights in other lives, God willing.
The lie was dead And damned, and truth stood up instead.
Over my head his arm he flung Against the world.
Oh never star Was lost here but it rose afar.
When the liquor 's out, why clink the cannikin?
Lofty designs must close in like effects.
Lost, lost! one moment knelled the woe of years.
Just for a handful of silver he left us, Just for a riband to stick in his coat.
'T is not what man does which exalts him, but what man would do.
That great brow And the spirit-small hand propping it.
Only I discern Infinite passion, and the pain Of finite hearts that yearn.
He who did well in war just earns the right To begin doing well in peace.
I count life just a stuff To try the soul's strength on.
What I aspired to be, And was not, comforts me.
Earth changes, but thy soul and God stand sure.
The body sprang At once to the height, and stayed; but the soul,--no!
How sad and bad and mad it was! But then, how it was sweet!
This could but have happened once, And we missed it, lost it forever.
In the great right of an excessive wrong.
Was never evening yet But seemed far beautifuller than its day.
The curious crime, the fine Felicity and flower of wickedness.
Of what I call God, And fools call Nature.
He 's tough, ma'am,--tough is J. B.; tough and devilish sly.
The bearings of this observation lays in the application on it.
In came Mrs. Fezziwig, one vast substantial smile.
Aid the dawning, tongue and pen; Aid it, hopes of honest men!
Some love to roam o'er the dark sea's foam, Where the shrill winds whistle free.
There 's a good time coming, boys! A good time coming.
Old Tubal Cain was a man of might In the days when earth was young.
America! half-brother of the world! With something good and bad of every land.
At present there is no distinction among the upper ten thousand of the city.
Most joyful let the Poet be; It is through him that all men see.
Earth's noblest thing,--a woman perfected.
To win the secret of a weed's plain heart.
All thoughts that mould the age begin Deep down within the primitive soul.
Endurance is the crowning quality, And patience all the passion of great hearts.
One day with life and heart Is more than time enough to find a world.
Truth forever on the scaffold, Wrong forever on the throne.
Before man made us citizens, great Nature made us men.
The thing we long for, that we are For one transcendent moment.
She doeth little kindnesses Which most leave undone, or despise.
'T is heaven alone that is given away; 'T is only God may be had for the asking.
Nature fits all her children with something to do.
This goin' ware glory waits ye haint one agreeable feetur.
We kind o' thought Christ went agin war an' pillage.
But John P. Robinson, he Sez they did n't know everythin' down in Judee.
I _don't_ believe in princerple, But oh I _du_ in interest.
Ez to my princerples, I glory In hevin' nothin' o' the sort.
The very room, coz she was in, Seemed warm from floor to ceilin'.
'T was kin' o' kingdom-come to look On sech a blessed cretur.
His heart kep' goin' pity-pat, But hern went pity-Zekle.
All kin' o' smily round the lips, An' teary round the lashes.
Like streams that keep a summer mind Snow-hid in Jenooary.
Our Pilgrim stock wuz pithed with hardihood.
Soft-heartedness, in times like these, Shows sof'ness in the upper story.
Earth's biggest country 's gut her soul, An' risen up earth's greatest nation.
Though old the thought and oft exprest, 'T is his at last who says it best.
Safe in the hallowed quiets of the past.
The one thing finished in this hasty world.
A wise scepticism is the first attribute of a good critic.
One thorn of experience is worth a whole wilderness of warning.
Aspiration sees only one side of every question; possession many.
What a sense of security in an old book which Time has criticised for us!
A great man is made up of qualities that meet or make great occasions.
I propose to fight it out on this line, if it takes all summer.
To hear the world applaud the hollow ghost Which blamed the living man.
Wandering between two worlds,--one dead, The other powerless to be born.
He serves his party best who serves the country best.
The bravest are the tenderest, The loving are the daring.
Like a pale martyr in his shirt of fire.
A song to the oak, the brave old oak, Who hath ruled in the greenwood long!
It is a condition which confronts us--not a theory.
I have considered the pension list of the republic a roll of honor.
With the smile that was childlike and bland.
He is a fool who thinks by force or skill To turn the current of a woman's will.
A liberty to that only which is good, just, and honest.
I preached as never sure to preach again, And as a dying man to dying men.
Though this may be play to you, 'T is death to us.
When change itself can give no more, 'T is easy to be true.
Studious of ease, and fond of humble things.
Busy, curious, thirsty fly, Drink with me, and drink as I.
Love divine, all love excelling, Joy of heaven to earth come down.
Where passion leads or prudence points the way.
And he that will this health deny, Down among the dead men let him lie.
Why should the Devil have all the good tunes?
Millions for defence, but not one cent for tribute.
Bounding billows, cease your motion, Bear me not so swiftly o'er.
The glory dies not, and the grief is past.
Oh, it 's a snug little island! A right little, tight little island.
They [the blacks] had no rights which the white man was bound to respect.
Unthinking, idle, wild, and young, I laugh'd and danc'd and talk'd and sung.
A sound so fine, there 's nothing lives 'Twixt it and silence.
We have met the enemy, and they are ours.
Say to the seceded States, "Wayward sisters, depart in peace."
Rock'd in the cradle of the deep, I lay me down in peace to sleep.
Her very frowns are fairer far Than smiles of other maidens are.
Oh, leave the gay and festive scenes, The halls of dazzling light.
If any one attempts to haul down the American flag, shoot him on the spot.
It would be superfluous in me to point out to your Lordship that this is war.
We have been friends together In sunshine and in shade.
Well, General, we have not had many dead cavalrymen lying about lately.
A mugwump is a person educated beyond his intellect.
Old Simon the cellarer keeps a rare store Of Malmsey and Malvoisie.
She 's all my fancy painted her; She 's lovely, she 's divine.
Stately and tall he moves in the hall, The chief of a thousand for grace.
When the sun's last rays are fading Into twilight soft and dim.
Rattle his bones over the stones! He 's only a pauper, whom nobody owns!
Betwixt the stirrup and the ground, Mercy I ask'd; mercy I found.
Mathew, Mark, Luke, and John, The bed be blest that I lye on.
When Adam dolve, and Eve span, Who was then the gentleman?
Now bething the, gentilman, How Adam dalf, and Eve span.
Use three Physicians, Still-first Dr. Quiet; Next Dr. Mery-man, And Dr. Dyet.
A woman's work, grave sirs, is never done.
The heart to conceive, the understanding to direct, or the hand to execute.
Happy am I; from care I 'm free! Why ar' n't they all contented like me?
It is so soon that I am done for, I wonder what I was begun for.
There is no gathering the rose without being pricked by the thorns.
What is bred in the bone will never come out of the flesh.
Guilty consciences always make people cowards.
There are some who bear a grudge even to those that do them good.
He that plants thorns must never expect to gather roses.
That possession was the strongest tenure of the law.
Night, having Sleep, the brother of Death.
From whose eyelids also as they gazed dropped love.
Fools! they know not how much half exceeds the whole.
Oft hath even a whole city reaped the evil fruit of a bad man.
For himself doth a man work evil in working evils for another.
Invite the man that loves thee to a feast, but let alone thine enemy.
A bad neighbour is as great a misfortune as a good one is a great blessing.
Gain not base gains; base gains are the same as losses.
Diligence increaseth the fruit of toil. A dilatory man wrestles with losses.
Observe moderation. In all, the fitting season is best.
No one goes to Hades with all his immense wealth.
I would far rather be ignorant than wise in the foreboding of evil.
Words are the physicians of a mind diseased.
Time as he grows old teaches many lessons.
God's mouth knows not to utter falsehood, but he will perform each word.
Learning is ever in the freshness of its youth, even for the old.
Bronze is the mirror of the form; wine, of the heart.
It is not the oath that makes us believe the man, but the man the oath.
Think not that thy word and thine alone must be right.
Death is not the worst evil, but rather when we wish to die and cannot.
In a just cause the weak o'ercome the strong.
A short saying oft contains much wisdom.
Do nothing secretly; for Time sees and hears all things, and discloses all.
It is better not to live at all than to live disgraced.
War loves to seek its victims in the young.
Children are the anchors that hold a mother to life.
The truth is always the strongest argument.
Fortune is not on the side of the faint-hearted.
Thoughts are mightier than strength of hand.
A wise player ought to accept his throws and score them, not bewail his luck.
If I am Sophocles, I am not mad; and if I am mad, I am not Sophocles.
The gifts of a bad man bring no good with them.
There is in the worst of fortune the best of chances for a happy change.
Slowly but surely withal moveth the might of the gods.
Thou didst bring me forth for all the Greeks in common, not for thyself alone.
Slight not what 's near through aiming at what 's far.
The company of just and righteous men is better than wealth and a rich estate.
The nobly born must nobly meet his fate.
Man's best possession is a sympathetic wife.
Ignorance of one's misfortunes is clear gain.
Toil, says the proverb, is the sire of fame.
Cowards do not count in battle; they are there, but not in it.
A woman should be good for everything at home, but abroad good for nothing.
Every man is like the company he is wont to keep.
Whoso neglects learning in his youth, loses the past and is dead for the future.
The gods visit the sins of the fathers upon the children.
Extreme remedies are very appropriate for extreme diseases.
Let thy speech be better than silence, or be silent.
What is yours is mine, and all mine is yours.
Not by years but by disposition is wisdom acquired.
In the one hand he is carrying a stone, while he shows the bread in the other.
I had a regular battle with the dunghill-cock.
It was not for nothing that the raven was just now croaking on my left hand.
Patience is the best remedy for every trouble.
If you are wise, be wise; keep what goods the gods provide you.
Nothing is there more friendly to a man than a friend in need.
To blow and swallow at the same moment is not easy.
Do not they bring it to pass by knowing that they know nothing at all?
Of surpassing beauty and in the bloom of youth.
The quarrels of lovers are the renewal of love.
Look you, I am the most concerned in my own interests.
In fine, nothing is said now that has not been said before.
It is up with you; all is over; you are ruined.
If I could believe that this was said sincerely, I could put up with anything.
This and a great deal more like it I have had to put up with.
Take care and say this with presence of mind.
It behooves a prudent person to make trial of everything before arms.
Many a time, . . . from a bad beginning great friendships have sprung up.
I only wish I may see your head stroked down with a slipper.
That saying which I hear commonly repeated,--that time assuages sorrow.
Really, you have seen the old age of an eagle,[704-1] as the saying is.
Nothing is so difficult but that it may be found out by seeking.
Rigorous law is often rigorous injustice.
How many things, both just and unjust, are sanctioned by custom!
As many men, so many minds; every one his own way.
As the saying is, I have got a wolf by the ears.
According as the man is, so must you humour him.
It is a maxim of old that among themselves all things are common to friends.
What comes from this quarter, set it down as so much gain.
It is the common vice of all, in old age, to be too intent upon our interests.
He is never less at leisure than when at leisure.
While the sick man has life there is hope.
What is food to one man may be fierce poison to others.
In peace, as a wise man, he should make suitable preparation for war.
What the discordant harmony of circumstances would and could effect.
If you wish me to weep, you yourself must feel grief.
The mountains will be in labour; an absurd mouse will be born.
They come to see; they come that they themselves may be seen.
It is the mind that makes the man, and our vigour is in our immortal soul.
The mind, conscious of rectitude, laughed to scorn the falsehood of report.
When God is planning ruin for a man, He first deprives him of his reason.
When I am dead let fire destroy the world; It matters not to me, for I am safe.
As men, we are all equal in the presence of death.
To do two things at once is to do neither.
We are interested in others when they are interested in us.
Every one excels in something in which another fails.
The anger of lovers renews the strength of love.
The loss which is unknown is no loss at all.
He sleeps well who knows not that he sleeps ill.
A good reputation is more valuable than money.
It is well to moor your bark with two anchors.
Learn to see in another's calamity the ills which you should avoid.
An agreeable companion on a journey is as good as a carriage.
Society in shipwreck is a comfort to all.
While we stop to think, we often miss our opportunity.
Whatever you can lose, you should reckon of no account.
It is sometimes expedient to forget who we are.
We may with advantage at times forget what we know.
You should hammer your iron when it is glowing hot.
A fair exterior is a silent recommendation.
Fortune is not satisfied with inflicting one calamity.
When Fortune is on our side, popular favour bears her company.
When Fortune flatters, she does it to betray.
Fortune is like glass,--the brighter the glitter, the more easily broken.
It is more easy to get a favour from fortune than to keep it.
His own character is the arbiter of every one's fortune.
There are some remedies worse than the disease.
Amid a multitude of projects, no plan is devised.
It is easy for men to talk one thing and think another.
When two do the same thing, it is not the same thing after all.
A cock has great influence on his own dunghill.
Any one can hold the helm when the sea is calm.
The bow too tensely strung is easily broken.
Treat your friend as if he might become an enemy.
No pleasure endures unseasoned by variety.
The judge is condemned when the criminal is acquitted.
Practice is the best of all instructors.
He who is bent on doing evil can never want occasion.
One man's wickedness may easily become all men's curse.
Never find your delight in another's misfortune.
It is a bad plan that admits of no modification.
It is better to have a little than nothing.
It is an unhappy lot which finds no enemies.
The fear of death is more to be dreaded than death itself.
Never promise more than you can perform.
A wise man never refuses anything to necessity.
No one should be judge in his own cause.
Necessity knows no law except to conquer.
Nothing can be done at once hastily and prudently.
We desire nothing so much as what we ought not to have.
It is only the ignorant who despise education.
Do not turn back when you are just at the goal.
It is not every question that deserves an answer.
No man is happy who does not think himself so.
Never thrust your own sickle into another's corn.
You cannot put the same shoe on every foot.
He bids fair to grow wise who has discovered that he is not so.
Every day should be passed as if it were to be our last.
Money alone sets all the world in motion.
He who has plenty of pepper will pepper his cabbage.
You should go to a pear-tree for pears, not to an elm.
It is a very hard undertaking to seek to please everybody.
We should provide in peace what we need in war.
How happy the life unembarrassed by the cares of business!
They who plough the sea do not carry the winds in their hands.
He gets through too late who goes too fast.
In every enterprise consider where you would come out.
It takes a long time to bring excellence to maturity.
The highest condition takes rise in the lowest.
It matters not what you are thought to be, but what you are.
No one knows what he can do till he tries.
The next day is never so good as the day before.
He is truly wise who gains wisdom from another's mishap.
Good health and good sense are two of life's greatest blessings.
It matters not how long you live, but how well.
It is vain to look for a defence against lightning.
Everything is worth what its purchaser will pay for it.
Better be ignorant of a matter than half know it.
Better use medicines at the outset than at the last moment.
Prosperity makes friends, adversity tries them.
Whom Fortune wishes to destroy she first makes mad.
Let a fool hold his tongue and he will pass for a sage.
He knows not when to be silent who knows not when to speak.
You need not hang up the ivy-branch over the wine that will sell.
It is a consolation to the wretched to have companions in misery.
Unless degree is preserved, the first place is safe for no one.
Confession of our faults is the next thing to innocency.
I have often regretted my speech, never my silence.
Keep the golden mean[714-5] between saying too much and too little.
Speech is a mirror of the soul: as a man speaks, so is he.
Fire is the test of gold; adversity, of strong men.
There is no great genius without a tincture of madness.
Do you seek Alcides' equal? None is, except himself.
Successful and fortunate crime is called virtue.
Submit to the present evil, lest a greater one befall you.
He who covets what belongs to another deservedly loses his own.
No one returns with good-will to the place which has done him a mischief.
Every one is bound to bear patiently the results of his own example.
With man, most of his misfortunes are occasioned by man.
When a building is about to fall down, all the mice desert it.
It has become quite a common proverb that in wine there is truth.
Always act in such a way as to secure the love of your neighbour.
The bird of passage known to us as the cuckoo.
We give to necessity the praise of virtue.
Vain hopes are often like the dreams of those who wake.
Those who wish to appear wise among fools, among the wise seem foolish.
No man ever became extremely wicked all at once.
Neither fear, nor wish for, your last day.
From Themistocles began the saying, "He is a second Hercules."
Themistocles said to Antiphales, "Time, young man, has taught us both a lesson."
Be ruled by time, the wisest counsellor of all.
Marius said, "I see the cure is not worth the pain."
Extraordinary rains pretty generally fall after great battles.
Lysander said that the law spoke too softly to be heard in such a noise of war.
As it is in the proverb, played Cretan against Cretan.
Did you not know, then, that to-day Lucullus sups with Lucullus?
The old proverb was now made good, "the mountain had brought forth a mouse."
For water continually dropping will wear hard rocks hollow.
It is a true proverb, that if you live with a lame man you will learn to halt.
According to the proverb, the best things are the most difficult.
Nothing made the horse so fat as the king's eye.
Democritus said, words are but the shadows of actions.
'T is a wise saying, Drive on your own track.
When men are arrived at the goal, they should not turn back.
An old doting fool, with one foot already in the grave.
Euripides was wont to say, "Silence is an answer to a wise man."
He was a man, which, as Plato saith, is a very inconstant creature.
The pilot cannot mitigate the billows or calm the winds.
Pyrrhus said, "If I should overcome the Romans in another fight, I were undone."
The measure of a man's life is the well spending of it, and not the length.
Said Periander, "Hesiod might as well have kept his breath to cool his pottage."
That proverbial saying, "Ill news goes quick and far."
Alexander was wont to say, "Were I not Alexander, I would be Diogenes."
When the candles are out all women are fair.
Like watermen, who look astern while they row the boat ahead.
Socrates said he was not an Athenian or a Greek, but a citizen of the world.
I am whatever was, or is, or will be; and my veil no mortal ever took up.
There is no debt with so much prejudice put off as that of justice.
He is a fool who lets slip a bird in the hand for a bird in the bush.
We are more sensible of what is done against custom than against Nature.
Xenophon says that there is no sound more pleasing than one's own praises.
For to err in opinion, though it be not the part of wise men, is at least human.
Simonides calls painting silent poetry, and poetry speaking painting.
Reason is not measured by size or height, but by principle.
Why, then, do you walk as if you had swallowed a ramrod?
Difficulties are things that show what men are.
The appearance of things to the mind is the standard of every action to man.
The essence of good and evil is a certain disposition of the will.
Appear to know only this,--never to fail nor fall.
There are some things which men confess with ease, and others with difficulty.
In every affair consider what precedes and what follows, and then undertake it.
First say to yourself what you would be; and then do what you have to do.
He had talents equal to business, and aspired no higher.
He possessed a peculiar talent of producing effect in whatever he said or did.
The gods looked with favour on superior courage.
They make solitude, which they call peace.
Think of your ancestors and your posterity.
It belongs to human nature to hate those you have injured.
Never do a thing concerning the rectitude of which you are in doubt.
The living voice is that which sways the soul.
An object in possession seldom retains the same charm that it had in pursuit.
This expression of ours, "Father of a family."
That indolent but agreeable condition of doing nothing.
The ways of the gods are full of providence.
Find time still to be learning somewhat good, and give up being desultory.
The lot assigned to every man is suited to him, and suits him to itself.
A man should _be_ upright, not be _kept_ upright.
Respect the faculty that forms thy judgments.
By a tranquil mind I mean nothing else than a mind well ordered.
The universe is change; our life is what our thoughts make it.
Nothing can come out of nothing, any more than a thing can go back to nothing.
Death, like generation, is a secret of Nature.
Love the little trade which thou hast learned, and be content therewith.
All is ephemeral,--fame and the famous as well.
That which comes after ever conforms to that which has gone before.
Nothing happens to anybody which he is not fitted by nature to bear.
Suit thyself to the estate in which thy lot is cast.
What is not good for the swarm is not good for the bee.
Let not thy mind run on what thou lackest as much as on what thou hast already.
Remember this,--that very little is needed to make a happy life.
A man's happiness,--to do the things proper to man.
Be not careless in deeds, nor confused in words, nor rambling in thought.
Things that have a common quality ever quickly seek their kind.
Whatever may befall thee, it was preordained for thee from everlasting.
No form of Nature is inferior to Art; for the arts merely imitate natural forms.
If it is not seemly, do it not; if it is not true, speak it not.
See how these Christians love one another.
Blood of the martyrs is the seed of the Church.
As some say, Solon was the author of the apophthegm, "Nothing in excess."
Chilo advised, "not to speak evil of the dead."
Pittacus said that half was more than the whole.
One of his sayings was, "Even the gods cannot strive against necessity."
The saying, "Practice is everything," is Periander's.
Socrates said, "Those who want fewest things are nearest to the gods."
He declared that he knew nothing, except the fact of his ignorance.
He used to say that other men lived to eat, but that he ate to live.
Aristippus said that a wise man's country was the world.
Like sending owls to Athens, as the proverb goes.
That virtue was sufficient of herself for happiness.
Plato was continually saying to Xenocrates, "Sacrifice to the Graces."
Bion insisted on the principle that "The property of friends is common."
Another of his sayings was, that education was the best viaticum of old age.
The chief good he has defined to be the exercise of virtue in a perfect life.
"Be of good cheer," said Diogenes; "I see land."
Asked from what country he came, he replied, "I am a citizen of the world."
When Zeno was asked what a friend was, he replied, "Another I."
They say that the first inclination which an animal has is to protect itself.
He calls drunkenness an expression identical with ruin.
Xenophanes was the first person who asserted . . . that the soul is a spirit.
It takes a wise man to discover a wise man.
Democritus says, "But we know nothing really; for truth lies deep down."
Epicurus laid down the doctrine that pleasure was the chief good.
He alludes to the appearance of a face in the orb of the moon.
Fortune is unstable, while our will is free.
Goodness does not consist in greatness, but greatness in goodness.
When I am here, I do not fast on Saturday; when at Rome, I do fast on Saturday.
The wretched souls of those who lived Without or praise or blame.
No greater grief than to remember days Of joy when misery is at hand.
For where God built a church, there the Devil would also build a chapel.
Let down the curtain: the farce is done.
Appetite comes with eating, says Angeston.
Thought the moon was made of green cheese.
He always looked a given horse in the mouth.
Subject to a kind of disease, which at that time they called lack of money.
So much is a man worth as he esteems himself.
You have there hit the nail on the head.
Above the pitch, out of tune, and off the hinges.
Do not believe what I tell you here any more than if it were some tale of a tub.
He that has patience may compass anything.
We will take the good will for the deed.
You are Christians of the best edition, all picked and culled.
He freshly and cheerfully asked him how a man should kill time.
The belly has no ears, nor is it to be filled with fair words.
Looking as like . . . as one pea does like another.
Nothing is so dear and precious as time.
It is meat, drink,[773-5] and cloth to us.
What is got over the Devil's back is spent under the belly.
Thought I to myself, we shall never come off scot-free.
It is enough to fright you out of your seven senses.
Panurge had no sooner heard this, but he was upon the high-rope.
We saw a knot of others, about a baker's dozen.
Spare your breath to cool your porridge.
I believe he would make three bites of a cherry.
Man in sooth is a marvellous, vain, fickle, and unstable subject.
He who should teach men to die would at the same time teach them to live.
There are some defeats more triumphant than victories.
Nothing is so firmly believed as what we least know.
A wise man never loses anything, if he has himself.
For a desperate disease a desperate cure.
He that I am reading seems always to have the most force.
How many worthy men have we seen survive their own reputation!
I find that the best virtue I have has in it some tincture of vice.
Nature forms us for ourselves, not for others; to be, not to seem.
The public weal requires that men should betray and lie and massacre.
Few men have been admired by their own domestics.
All the world knows me in my book, and my book in me.
What if he has borrowed the matter and spoiled the form, as it oft falls out?
Not because Socrates said so, . . . I look upon all men as my compatriots.
A little folly is desirable in him that will not be guilty of stupidity.
We seek and offer ourselves to be gulled.
I have never seen a greater monster or miracle in the world than myself.
Men are most apt to believe what they least understand.
The diversity of physical arguments and opinions embraces all sorts of methods.
And reads, though running,[780-3] all these needful motions.
Mercy and justice, marching cheek by joule.
And swans seem whiter if swart crowes be by.
From the foure corners of the worlde doe haste.
Oft seen in forehead of the frowning skies.
Bright-flaming, heat-full fire, The source of motion.
'T is what you will,--or will be what you would.
To man the earth seems altogether No more a mother, but a step-dame rather.
A good turn at need, At first or last, shall be assur'd of meed.
These lovely lamps, these windows of the soul.
Two souls in one, two hearts into one heart.
Which serves for cynosure To all that sail upon the sea obscure.
Dog, ounce, bear, and bull, Wolfe, lion, horse.
Apoplexie and lethargie, As forlorn hope, assault the enemy.
Did thrust as now in others' corn his sickle.
Will change the pebbles of our puddly thought To orient pearls.
Soft carpet-knights, all scenting musk and amber.
Only that he may conform To tyrant custom.
Who breaks his faith, no faith is held with him.
My lovely living boy, My hope, my hap, my love, my life, my joy.
Out of the book of Natur's learned brest.
Flesh of thy flesh, nor yet bone of thy bone.
Through thick and thin, both over hill and plain.
I was so free with him as not to mince the matter.
They can expect nothing but their labour for their pains.
The brave man carves out his fortune, and every man is the son of his own works.
Which I have earned with the sweat of my brows.
Can we ever have too much of a good thing?
The charging of his enemy was but the work of a moment.
Fortune leaves always some door open to come at a remedy.
You are taking the wrong sow by the ear.
I find my familiarity with thee has bred contempt.
The more thou stir it, the worse it will be.
Give me but that, and let the world rub; there I 'll stick.
Of good natural parts and of a liberal education.
Thou art a cat, and a rat, and a coward.
I know what 's what, and have always taken care of the main chance.
The ease of my burdens, the staff of my life.
I am almost frighted out of my seven senses.
She may guess what I should perform in the wet, if I do so much in the dry.
It will grieve me so to the heart, that I shall cry my eyes out.
They must needs go whom the Devil drives.
A bird in the hand is worth two in the bush.
I never saw a more dreadful battle in my born days.
When the head aches, all the members partake of the pain.
Every man is as Heaven made him, and sometimes a great deal worse.
Spare your breath to cool your porridge.
A little in one's own pocket is better than much in another man's purse.
Remember the old saying, "Faint heart never won fair lady."
Are we to mark this day with a white or a black stone?
There were but two families in the world, Have-much and Have-little.
He has an oar in every man's boat, and a finger in every pie.
Tell me thy company, and I will tell thee what thou art.
He is as like one, as one egg is like another.
You can see farther into a millstone than he.
Sancho Panza by name, is my own self, if I was not changed in my cradle.
Building castles in the air,[790-2] and making yourself a laughing-stock.
I must follow him through thick and thin.
Time ripens all things. No man is born wise.
I drink when I have occasion, and sometimes when I have no occasion.
An honest man's word is as good as his bond.
Heaven's help is better than early rising.
Many go out for wool, and come home shorn themselves.
They had best not stir the rice, though it sticks to the pot.
Good wits jump;[791-2] a word to the wise is enough.
You may as well expect pears from an elm.
You cannot eat your cake and have your cake;[791-5] and store 's no sore.
Diligence is the mother of good fortune.
When thou art at Rome, do as they do at Rome.
Never look for birds of this year in the nests of the last.
Don't put too fine a point to your wit for fear it should get blunted.
My heart is wax moulded as she pleases, but enduring as marble to retain.
We need greater virtues to sustain good than evil fortune.
Neither the sun nor death can be looked at with a steady eye.
We are never so happy or so unhappy as we suppose.
True love is like ghosts, which everybody talks about and few have seen.
Silence is the best resolve for him who distrusts himself.
A man who is ungrateful is often less to blame than his benefactor.
The understanding is always the dupe of the heart.
Nothing is given so profusely as advice.
The true way to be deceived is to think oneself more knowing than others.
Most people judge men only by success or by fortune.
Hypocrisy is the homage vice pays to virtue.
Too great haste to repay an obligation is a kind of ingratitude.
There is great ability in knowing how to conceal one's ability.
We always like those who admire us; we do not always like those whom we admire.
The gratitude of most men is but a secret desire of receiving greater benefits.
Lovers are never tired of each other, though they always speak of themselves.
We hardly find any persons of good sense save those who agree with us.
The greatest fault of a penetrating wit is to go beyond the mark.
We may give advice, but we cannot inspire the conduct.
The veracity which increases with old age is not far from folly.
Quarrels would not last long if the fault was only on one side.
The opinion of the strongest is always the best.
It is a double pleasure to deceive the deceiver.
It is impossible to please all the world and one's father.
In everything one must consider the end.
"They are too green," he said, "and only good for fools."
Let ignorance talk as it will, learning has its value.
The world, dear Agnes, is a strange affair.
Although I am a pious man, I am not the less a man.
The real Amphitryon is the Amphitryon who gives dinners.
You are speaking before a man to whom all Naples is known.
My fair one, let us swear an eternal friendship.
I will maintain it before the whole world.
What the devil did he want in that galley?
Grammar, which knows how to control even kings.
Man is but a reed, the weakest in nature, but he is a thinking reed.
It is not permitted to the most equitable of men to be a judge in his own cause.
The last thing that we find in making a book is to know what we must put first.
Rivers are highways that move on, and bear us whither we wish to go.
We know the truth, not only by the reason, but also by the heart.
Every age has its pleasures, its style of wit, and its own ways.
It may be said that his wit shines at the expense of his memory.
I wish you all sorts of prosperity with a little more taste.
If there were no God, it would be necessary to invent him.
History is little else than a picture of human crimes and misfortunes.
The superfluous, a very necessary thing.
There are truths which are not for all men, nor for all times.
It is said that God is always on the side of the heaviest battalions.
He [Voltaire] has invented history. It is only the first step which costs.
Whatever you do, do wisely, and think of the consequences.
O Richard! O my king! The universe forsakes thee!
The congress of Vienna does not walk, but it dances.
Art is long, life short;[803-4] judgment difficult, opportunity transient.
O Liberty! Liberty! how many crimes are committed in thy name!
The tree of liberty only grows when watered by the blood of tyrants.
Against stupidity the very gods Themselves contend in vain.
Into the silent land! Ah, who shall lead us thither?
I am not the rose, but I have lived near the rose.
I know nothing about it; I am my own ancestor.
Two souls with but a single thought, Two hearts that beat as one.
And God said, Let there be light: and there was light.
It is not good that the man should be alone.
Bone of my bones, and flesh of my flesh.
They sewed fig-leaves together and made themselves aprons.
In the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat bread.
For dust thou art, and unto dust shalt thou return.
My punishment is greater than I can bear.
There were giants in the earth in those days.
And the rain was upon the earth forty days and forty nights.
The dove found no rest for the sole of her foot.
Whoso sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed.
Let there be no strife, I pray thee, between thee and me.
His hand will be against every man, and every man's hand against him.
His wife looked back from behind him, and she became a pillar of salt.
The voice is Jacob's voice, but the hands are the hands of Esau.
They stript Joseph out of his coat, his coat of many colours.
Bring down my gray hairs with sorrow to the grave.
Unstable as water, thou shalt not excel.
I have been a stranger in a strange land.
Let me die the death of the righteous, and let my last end be like his!
How goodly are thy tents, O Jacob, and thy tabernacles, O Israel!
Eye for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for hand, foot for foot.
Blessed shall be thy basket and thy store.
His eye was not dim, nor his natural force abated.
The stars in their courses fought against Sisera.
She brought forth butter in a lordly dish.
David therefore departed thence and escaped to the cave Adullam.
Tell it not in Gath; publish it not in the streets of Askelon.
Thy love to me was wonderful, passing the love of women.
Abner . . . smote him under the fifth rib.
Tarry at Jericho until your beards be grown.
As water spilt on the ground, which cannot be gathered up again.
I have commanded a widow woman there to sustain thee.
An handful of meal in a barrel, and a little oil in a cruse.
And the barrel of meal wasted not, neither did the cruse of oil fail.
There ariseth a little cloud out of the sea, like a man's hand.
Let not him that girdeth on his harness boast himself as he that putteth it off.
Is thy servant a dog, that he should do this great thing?
Like the driving of Jehu, the son of Nimshi: for he driveth furiously.
The Lord gave, and the Lord hath taken away; blessed be the name of the Lord.
All that a man hath will he give for his life.
There the wicked cease from troubling, and there the weary be at rest.
Man is born unto trouble, as the sparks fly upward.
He taketh the wise in their own craftiness.
My days are swifter than a weaver's shuttle.
He shall return no more to his house, neither shall his place know him any more.
The land of darkness and the shadow of death.
Speak to the earth, and it shall teach thee.
Man that is born of a woman is of few days, and full of trouble.
Oh that my words were now written! oh that they were printed in a book!
Seeing the root of the matter is found in me.
Though wickedness be sweet in his mouth, though he hide it under his tongue.
I caused the widow's heart to sing for joy.
I was eyes to the blind, and feet was I to the lame.
My desire is . . . that mine adversary had written a book.
Who is this that darkeneth counsel by words without knowledge?
The morning stars sang together, and all the sons of God shouted for joy.
Canst thou bind the sweet influences of Pleiades, or loose the bands of Orion?
Canst thou guide Arcturus with his sons?
Canst thou draw out leviathan with an hook?
Hard as a piece of the nether millstone.
I have heard of thee by the hearing of the ear; but now mine eye seeth thee.
Lift thou up the light of thy countenance upon us.
Out of the mouth of babes[818-1] and sucklings.
Thou hast made him a little lower than the angels.
The fool hath said in his heart, There is no God.
He that sweareth to his own hurt, and changeth not.
Keep me as the apple of the eye,[818-4] hide me under the shadow of thy wings.
He rode upon a cherub, and did fly: yea, he did fly upon the wings of the wind.
The heavens declare the glory of God; and the firmament showeth his handiwork.
Day unto day uttereth speech, and night unto night showeth knowledge.
And there is nothing hid from the heat thereof.
Sweeter also than honey and the honeycomb.
Keep thy tongue from evil, and thy lips from speaking guile.
Spreading[819-7] himself like a green bay-tree.
Mark the perfect man, and behold the upright.
Every man at his best state is altogether vanity.
He heapeth up riches, and knoweth not[820-3] who shall gather them.
Blessed is he that considereth the poor.
As the hart panteth after the water-brooks.
God is our refuge and strength, a very present help in trouble.
Man being in honour abideth not; he is like the beasts that perish.
But it was thou, a man mine equal, my guide, and mine acquaintance.
The words of his mouth were smoother than butter, but war was in his heart.
He shall come down like rain upon the mown grass.
He putteth down one and setteth up another.
We spend our years as a tale that is told.
So teach us to number our days, that we may apply our hearts unto wisdom.
The Lord reigneth; let the earth rejoice.
As for man his days are as grass; as a flower of the field so he flourisheth.
Man goeth forth unto his work[823-3] and to his labour until the evening.
They that go down to the sea in ships, that do business in great waters.
Precious[823-6] in the sight of the Lord is the death of his saints.
The stone which the builders refused is become the head stone of the corner.
A lamp unto my feet and a light unto my path.
The sun shall not smite thee by day, nor the moon by night.
Peace be within thy walls, and prosperity[824-2] within thy palaces.
Happy is the man that hath his quiver full of them.
Thy children like olive plants[824-3] round about thy table.
I will not give sleep to mine eyes, or slumber to mine eyelids.
If I forget thee, O Jerusalem, let my right hand forget her cunning.
My son, if sinners entice thee, consent thou not.
Wisdom crieth without; she uttereth her voice in the street.
Length of days is in her right hand; and in her left hand riches and honour.
Her ways are ways of pleasantness, and all her paths are peace.
Go to the ant, thou sluggard; consider her ways, and be wise.
Yet a little sleep, a little slumber, a little folding of the hands to sleep.
So shall thy poverty come as one that travelleth, and thy want as an armed man.
Can a man take fire in his bosom, and his clothes not be burned?
Stolen waters are sweet, and bread eaten in secret is pleasant.
The destruction of the poor is their poverty.
In the multitude of counsellors there is safety.
He that is surety for a stranger shall smart for it.
The prudent man looketh well to his going.
The talk of the lips tendeth only to penury.
A merry heart maketh a cheerful countenance.
He that is of a merry heart hath a continual feast.
A word spoken in due season, how good is it!
A man's heart deviseth his way; but the Lord directeth his steps.
Pride goeth before destruction, and an haughty spirit before a fall.
The lot is cast into the lap; but the whole disposing thereof is of the Lord.
A gift is as a precious stone in the eyes of him that hath it.
He that repeateth a matter separateth very friends.
A merry heart doeth good like a medicine.
The eyes of a fool are in the ends of the earth.
He that hath knowledge spareth his words.
Even a fool, when he holdeth his peace, is counted wise.
Whoso findeth a wife findeth a good thing.
He that hath pity upon the poor lendeth unto the Lord.
Wine is a mocker, strong drink is raging.
A good name is rather to be chosen than great riches.
Put a knife to thy throat, if thou be a man given to appetite.
Drowsiness shall clothe a man with rags.
A wise man is strong; yea, a man of knowledge increaseth strength.
If thou faint in the day of adversity thy strength is small.
A word fitly spoken is like apples of gold in pictures of silver.
As cold waters to a thirsty soul, so is good news from a far country.
There is a lion in the way; a lion is in the streets.
Wiser in his own conceit than seven men that can render a reason.
Boast not thyself of to-morrow; for thou knowest not what a day may bring forth.
A continual dropping in a very rainy day and a contentious woman are alike.
Iron sharpeneth iron; so a man sharpeneth the countenance of his friend.
The wicked flee when no man pursueth; but the righteous are bold as a lion.
He that maketh haste to be rich shall not be innocent.
Where there is no vision, the people perish.
The horseleech hath two daughters, crying, Give, give.
Her children arise up and call her blessed.
Many daughters have done virtuously, but thou excellest them all.
Favour is deceitful, and beauty is vain.
Vanity of vanities, . . . all is vanity.
One generation passeth away, and another generation cometh.
He that increaseth knowledge increaseth sorrow.
To everything there is a season, and a time to every purpose under the heaven.
A good name is better than precious ointment.
It is better to go to the house of mourning than to go to the house of feasting.
As the crackling of thorns under a pot, so is the laughter of a fool.
In the day of prosperity be joyful, but in the day of adversity consider.
God hath made man upright; but they have sought out many inventions.
A living dog is better than a dead lion.
Whatsoever thy hand findeth to do, do it with thy might.
The race is not to the swift, nor the battle to the strong.
Cast thy bread upon the waters; for thou shalt find it after many days.
In the place where the tree falleth, there it shall be.
In the morning sow thy seed, and in the evening withhold not thine hand.
Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy youth.
The grinders cease because they are few.
Love is strong as death; jealousy is cruel as the grave.
Many waters cannot quench love, neither can the floods drown it.
The ox knoweth his owner, and the ass his master's crib.
The whole head is sick, and the whole heart faint.
In that day a man shall cast his idols . . . to the moles and to the bats.
Cease ye from man, whose breath is in his nostrils.
The stay and the staff, the whole stay of bread, and the whole stay of water.
Walk with stretched-forth necks and wanton eyes, walking and mincing as they go.
In that day seven women shall take hold of one man.
Woe unto them that call evil good, and good evil.
Hell from beneath is moved for thee to meet thee at thy coming.
How art thou fallen from heaven, O Lucifer, son of the morning!
Let us eat and drink; for to-morrow we shall die.
We have made a covenant with death, and with hell are we at agreement.
Now go, write it before them in a table, and note it in a book.
The desert shall rejoice, and blossom as the rose.
Thou trustest in the staff of this broken reed.
A bruised reed shall he not break, and the smoking flax shall he not quench.
There is no peace, saith the Lord, unto the wicked.
He is brought as a lamb to the slaughter.
Let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts.
A little one shall become a thousand, and a small one a strong nation.
Is there no balm in Gilead? Is there no physician there?
Oh that I had in the wilderness a lodging-place of wayfaring men!
Can the Ethiopian change his skin, or the leopard his spots?
A man of strife and a man of contention.
Written with a pen of iron, and with the point of a diamond.
He shall be buried with the burial of an ass.
As if a wheel had been in the midst of a wheel.
The fathers have eaten sour grapes, and the children's teeth are set on edge.
Thou art weighed in the balances, and art found wanting.
According to the law of the Medes and Persians.
Many shall run to and fro, and knowledge shall be increased.
They have sown the wind, and they shall reap the whirlwind.
I have multiplied visions, and used similitudes.
Your old men shall dream dreams, your young men shall see visions.
They shall sit every man under his vine and under his fig-tree.
Your fathers, where are they? And the prophets, do they live forever?
For who hath despised the day of small things?
I was wounded in the house of my friends.
Great is truth, and mighty above all things.
So they went their way, and the dog went after them.
Our time is a very shadow that passeth away.
Let us crown ourselves with rosebuds before they be withered.
Wisdom is the gray hair unto men, and an unspotted life is old age.
Be not ignorant of anything in a great matter or a small.
Whatsoever thou takest in hand, remember the end, and thou shalt never do amiss.
He that toucheth pitch shall be defiled therewith.
These were honoured in their generations, and were the glory of the times.
There be of them that have left a name behind them.
Ye are the light of the world. A city that is set on an hill cannot be hid.
Take heed that ye do not your alms before men, to be seen of them.
When thou doest alms, let not thy left hand know what thy right hand doeth.
They think that they shall be heard for their much speaking.
Lay up for yourselves treasures in heaven.
Where your treasure is, there will your heart be also.
Take no thought for your life, what ye shall eat, or what ye shall drink.
Neither cast ye your pearls before swine.
Every one that asketh receiveth; and he that seeketh findeth.
Wide is the gate and broad is the way that leadeth to destruction.
Strait is the gate and narrow is the way.
The harvest truly is plenteous, but the labourers are few.
Be ye therefore wise as serpents, and harmless as doves.
The very hairs of your head are all numbered.
Out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaketh.
A prophet is not without honour, save in his own country and in his own house.
Be of good cheer: it is I; be not afraid.
If the blind lead the blind, both shall fall into the ditch.
The dogs eat of the crumbs which fall from their masters' table.
When it is evening, ye say it will be fair weather: for the sky is red.
What is a man profited, if he shall gain the whole world, and lose his own soul?
What therefore God hath joined together, let not man put asunder.
Is it not lawful for me to do what I will with mine own?
For many are called, but few are chosen.
Woe unto you, . . . for ye pay tithe of mint and anise and cummin.
Blind guides, which strain at a gnat, and swallow a camel.
As a hen gathereth her chickens under her wings.
Wheresoever the carcass is, there will the eagles be gathered together.
The spirit indeed is willing, but the flesh is weak.
The Sabbath was made for man, and not man for the Sabbath.
If a house be divided against itself, that house cannot stand.
He that hath ears to hear, let him hear.
My little daughter lieth at the point of death.
Where their worm dieth not, and the fire is not quenched.
Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace, good will toward men.
The axe is laid unto the root of the trees.
Woe unto you, when all men shall speak well of you!
Nothing is secret which shall not be made manifest.
Let your loins be girded about, and your lights burning.
Out of thine own mouth will I judge thee.
If they do these things in a green tree, what shall be done in the dry?
Did not our heart burn within us while he talked with us?
The true light, which lighteth every man that cometh into the world.
Can there any good thing come out of Nazareth?
Gather up the fragments that remain, that nothing be lost.
Walk while ye have the light, lest darkness come upon you.
It is hard for thee to kick against the pricks.
It is more blessed to give than to receive.
Brought up in this city at the feet of Gamaliel.
When I have a convenient season, I will call for thee.
For this thing was not done in a corner.
Almost thou persuadest me to be a Christian.
There is no respect of persons with God.
For the good that I would I do not; but the evil which I would not, that I do.
All things work together for good to them that love God.
A zeal of God, but not according to knowledge.
If it be possible, as much as lieth in you, live peaceably with all men.
Be not overcome of evil, but overcome evil with good.
Owe no man anything, but to love one another.
Let every man be fully persuaded in his own mind.
I have planted, Apollos watered; but God gave the increase.
Every man's work shall be made manifest.
Not to think of men above that which is written.
Let him that thinketh he standeth take heed lest he fall.
We know in part, and we prophesy in part.
Let all things be done decently and in order.
Evil communications corrupt good manners.
O death, where is thy sting? O grave, where is thy victory?
We have such hope, we use great plainness of speech.
As having nothing, and yet possessing all things.
It is good to be zealously affected always in a good thing.
A little leaven leaveneth the whole lump.
Whatsoever a man soweth, that shall he also reap.
Carried about with every wind of doctrine.
Speak every man truth with his neighbour.
Be ye angry, and sin not: let not the sun go down upon your wrath.
Whose God is their belly, and whose glory is in their shame.
The peace of God, which passeth all understanding.
I have learned, in whatsoever state I am, therewith to be content.
Set your affections on things above, not on things on the earth.
Let your speech be alway with grace, seasoned with salt.
Prove all things; hold fast that which is good.
The law is good, if a man use it lawfully.
He hath denied the faith, and is worse than an infidel.
Busybodies, speaking things which they ought not.
Drink no longer water, but use a little wine for thy stomach's sake.
The love of money is the root of all evil.
A workman that needeth not to be ashamed.
I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith.
Such as have need of milk, and not of strong meat.
Strong meat belongeth to them that are of full age.
If God be for us, who can be against us.
Faith is the substance of things hoped for, the evidence of things not seen.
Be swift to hear, slow to speak, slow to wrath.
How great a matter a little fire kindleth!
The tongue can no man tame; it is an unruly evil.
Resist the Devil, and he will flee from you.
Giving honour unto the wife as unto the weaker vessel.
Charity shall cover the multitude of sins.
The dog is turned to his own vomit again.
There is no fear in love; but perfect love casteth out fear.
I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end, the first and the last.
Afflicted, or distressed, in mind, body, or estate.
From envy, hatred, and malice, and all uncharitableness.
The pomps and vanity of this wicked world.
To keep my hands from picking and stealing.
To do my duty in that state of life unto which it shall please God to call me.
An outward and visible sign of an inward and spiritual grace.
Let him now speak, or else hereafter for ever hold his peace.
Show thy servant the light of thy countenance.
But it was even thou, my companion, my guide, and mine own familiar friend.
The dew of thy birth is of the womb of the morning.
And though he promise to his loss, He makes his promise good.
The sweet remembrance of the just Shall flourish when he sleeps in dust.
